# Relates to shared renewable energy facilities

**Bill ID:** A3266
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Daniel O'Donnell
**Status:** In Assembly Committee

## Summary

Relates to shared renewable energy facilities; provides for the determination of credits of subscribers to such facilities.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  3266
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 2, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  O'DONNELL  --  read once and referred to the
  Committee on Energy
 
 AN ACT to amend the public service law, in relation to shared  renewable
  energy facilities
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The public service law is amended by adding a  new  section
 66-u to read as follows:
  ยง 66-U. SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITIES. 1. DEFINITIONS. AS USED IN
 THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  (A) "SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY" MEANS RENEWABLE ENERGY TECHNOL-
 OGY THAT IS OWNED OR DEVELOPED BY AN ENTITY OTHER THAN A PUBLIC AUTHORI-
 TY  OR  AN  ELECTRIC  DISTRIBUTION  COMPANY  AND  THAT  IS MANUFACTURED,
 INSTALLED, AND OPERATED IN ACCORDANCE  WITH  APPLICABLE  GOVERNMENT  AND
 INDUSTRY  STANDARDS;  THAT IS CONNECTED TO THE ELECTRIC SYSTEM AND OPER-
 ATED IN CONJUNCTION WITH  AN  ELECTRIC  CORPORATION'S  TRANSMISSION  AND
 DISTRIBUTION  FACILITIES; THAT IS OPERATED IN COMPLIANCE WITH ANY STAND-
 ARDS AND REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SECTION;  AND  WHERE  ELEC-
 TRICITY  GENERATED BY THE FACILITY IS CREDITED TO THE SUBSCRIBERS OF THE
 FACILITY. A SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY:
  (I) SHALL UTILIZE ONE OF THE FOLLOWING RENEWABLE  ENERGY  TECHNOLOGIES
 AS DEFINED BY SECTIONS SIXTY-SIX-J AND SIXTY-SIX-L OF THIS ARTICLE:  (A)
 SOLAR  ELECTRIC GENERATING EQUIPMENT; (B) FARM WASTE ELECTRIC GENERATING
 EQUIPMENT; (C) FUEL CELL ELECTRIC GENERATING  EQUIPMENT;  (D)  MICRO-HY-
 DROELECTRIC  GENERATING  EQUIPMENT;  AND  (E)  WIND  ELECTRIC GENERATING
 EQUIPMENT;
  (II) SHALL HAVE AT LEAST TWO SUBSCRIBERS; AND
  (III) SHALL HAVE A RATED CAPACITY OF NOT MORE THAN TWO THOUSAND  KILO-
 WATTS,  AND THE COMMISSION SHALL HAVE THE AUTHORITY TO DETERMINE MAXIMUM
 RATED CAPACITY THRESHOLDS FOR SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY  FACILITIES  BASED
 UPON  AN  EVALUATION  AND FINDING OF PUBLIC INTEREST, AS DETERMINED BY A
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07693-01-3
 A. 3266  2
 
 STAKEHOLDER PROCESS THROUGH  A  PROCEEDING  TO  BE  ESTABLISHED  BY  THE
 COMMISSION, AND THE ATTRIBUTES OF EACH RENEWABLE ENERGY TECHNOLOGY.
  (B)  "SUBSCRIBER"  MEANS  A  CUSTOMER  OF  AN ELECTRIC CORPORATION WHO
 SUBSCRIBES TO A SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY AND WHO HAS  IDENTIFIED
 AN  INDIVIDUAL  METER AT ANY PROPERTY OWNED OR LEASED BY THE CUSTOMER TO
 WHICH THE SUBSCRIPTION SHALL BE ATTRIBUTED.  SUCH METERS SHALL BE WITHIN
 THE SERVICE TERRITORY OF THE SAME  ELECTRIC  CORPORATION  TO  WHICH  THE
 SHARED  RENEWABLE  ENERGY FACILITY IS INTERCONNECTED AND WITHIN THE SAME
 LOAD ZONE OF THE NEW YORK INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATOR AS  DETERMINED  BY
 THE  LOCATIONAL  BASED  MARGINAL  PRICE  AS  OF  THE DATE OF THE INITIAL
 REQUEST BY THE SUBSCRIBER ORGANIZATION TO INTERCONNECT THE SHARED RENEW-
 ABLE ENERGY FACILITY.
  (C) "SUBSCRIBER ORGANIZATION" MEANS AN ORGANIZATION WHOSE  PURPOSE  IS
 TO  OWN AND OPERATE A SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY FOR THE SUBSCRIB-
 ERS OF THE SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY. A  SUBSCRIBER  ORGANIZATION
 MAY BE ANY FOR-PROFIT OR NON-PROFIT ENTITY AND SHALL BE PERMITTED BY THE
 STATE  PURSUANT TO SECTION SIXTY-EIGHT OF THIS CHAPTER IF, AS DETERMINED
 BY THE COMMISSION TO BE IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST PURSUANT TO A STAKEHOLDER
 PROCESS THROUGH A PROCEEDING TO BE ESTABLISHED BY  THE  COMMISSION,  THE
 SUBSCRIBER ORGANIZATION'S SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY HAS A MAXIMUM
 RATED CAPACITY THRESHOLD LARGER THAN TWO THOUSAND KILOWATTS.
  (I)  THE  SUBSCRIBER  ORGANIZATION  SHALL  FILE WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF
 STATE  ARTICLES  OF  INCORPORATION,  AMENDMENT,  CONSOLIDATION,  MERGER,
 CONVERSION,  OR  DISSOLUTION,  WHEN EXECUTED AND ACKNOWLEDGED, INCLUDING
 SUCH AFFIDAVITS AS MAY BE REQUIRED  BY  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE.  THE
 SECRETARY  OF  STATE SHALL, UPON THE PAYMENT OF THE FEES AS SPECIFIED IN
 THIS PARAGRAPH, INDEX SUCH ARTICLES. UPON THE FILING OF  SUCH  ARTICLES,
 THE  INCORPORATION,  AMENDMENT,  CONSOLIDATION,  MERGER,  CONVERSION, OR
 DISSOLUTION PROVIDED FOR THEREIN SHALL BE IN EFFECT.  THE DEPARTMENT  OF
 STATE SHALL CHARGE AND COLLECT FOR:
  (1) FILING ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION, FORTY DOLLARS;
  (2) FILING ARTICLES OF AMENDMENT, TWENTY-FIVE DOLLARS;
  (3) FILING ARTICLES OF CONSOLIDATION OR MERGER, TWENTY-FIVE DOLLARS;
  (4) FILING ARTICLES OF CONVERSION, TWENTY-FIVE DOLLARS;
  (5) FILING CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION TO DISSOLVE, FIVE DOLLARS;
  (6) FILING ARTICLES OF DISSOLUTION, FIVE DOLLARS; AND
  (7) FILING CERTIFICATE OF CHANGE OF PRINCIPAL OFFICE, FIFTEEN DOLLARS.
  (II)  EACH  SUBSCRIBER  ORGANIZATION SHALL FILE WITH THE COMMISSION AN
 ANNUAL REPORT, WHICH SHALL SHOW IN DETAIL:
  (1) THE NUMBER OF ITS MEMBERS;
  (2) THE AMOUNT OF ITS OUTSTANDING INDEBTEDNESS;
  (3) ITS RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES DURING THE PRECEDING YEAR;
  (4) THE AMOUNT PAID IN REDUCTION OF ITS INDEBTEDNESS AND  AS  INTEREST
 UPON ITS INDEBTEDNESS;
  (5)  THE  NAMES OF ITS OFFICERS AND THE AGGREGATE AMOUNT PAID AS SALA-
 RIES TO THEM AND THE AMOUNT PAID AS WAGES TO ANY OF ITS EMPLOYEES; AND
  (6) THE LOCATION OF ITS PLANT  OR  PLANTS  AND  SYSTEM,  WITH  A  FULL
 DESCRIPTION OF ITS PROPERTY AND FRANCHISE AREAS.
  (D)  "SUBSCRIBER AGREEMENT" MEANS A WRITTEN AGREEMENT IDENTIFYING EACH
 SUBSCRIBER OF A SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY,  WHICH  SHALL  INCLUDE
 THE  NAME, ADDRESS, AND THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION ACCOUNT NUMBER TO WHICH
 THE SUBSCRIPTION SHALL BE ATTRIBUTED.  THE  SUBSCRIBER  AGREEMENT  SHALL
 DESIGNATE  THE  PORTION  OF  PRODUCTION FROM THE SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY
 FACILITY ALLOCATED TO EACH SUBSCRIBER FOR THE  PURPOSES  OF  CALCULATING
 THE  BILL  CREDIT  TO EACH SUBSCRIBER. THE SUBSCRIBER AGREEMENT SHALL BE
 A. 3266  3
 
 FILED BY THE SUBSCRIBER ORGANIZATION WITH THE  ELECTRIC  CORPORATION  TO
 WHICH THE SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY IS INTERCONNECTED.
  (E)  "SUBSCRIPTION"  MEANS  A  DIRECT OR INDIRECT OWNERSHIP, LEASE, OR
 FINANCIAL INTEREST IN A SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY THAT ENABLES  A
 SUBSCRIBER  TO RECEIVE A BILL CREDIT FOR A RETAIL ACCOUNT WITH THE ELEC-
 TRIC CORPORATION. EACH SUBSCRIPTION SHALL  BE  SIZED  TO  REPRESENT  THE
 ENERGY  PRODUCTION  FROM  AT  LEAST ONE KILOWATT OF THE SHARED RENEWABLE
 ENERGY  FACILITY'S  GENERATING  CAPACITY  PROVIDED,  HOWEVER,  THAT  THE
 SUBSCRIPTION IS SIZED TO PRODUCE NO MORE THAN ONE HUNDRED PERCENT OF THE
 SUBSCRIBER'S  AVERAGE  ANNUAL  ELECTRICAL  CONSUMPTION.  IN  SIZING  THE
 SUBSCRIPTION, A DEDUCTION FOR THE AMOUNT OF ANY EXISTING RENEWABLE ENER-
 GY GENERATION AT THE SUBSCRIBER'S PREMISES AND ANY SUBSCRIPTIONS BY  THE
 SUBSCRIBER IN OTHER SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITIES SHALL BE MADE.
  (F) "BILL CREDIT" MEANS AN AMOUNT OF MONEY CREDITED EACH BILLING PERI-
 OD  TO AN ELECTRIC ACCOUNT BASED ON A SUBSCRIPTION TO A SHARED RENEWABLE
 ENERGY FACILITY AND PURSUANT TO A SUBSCRIBER AGREEMENT AND THE METHODOL-
 OGY USED FOR CALCULATION OF THE BILL CREDIT AS  ESTABLISHED  UNDER  THIS
 SECTION.
  2.  PROVISIONS  PERTAINING  TO SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITIES. (A)
 THE DETERMINATION OF THE BILL CREDIT AVAILABLE TO EACH SUBSCRIBER  OF  A
 SHARED  RENEWABLE  ENERGY  FACILITY  SHALL BE BASED ON EACH SUBSCRIBER'S
 SUBSCRIPTION IN THAT SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY.
  (B) FOR A SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY, THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF  ELEC-
 TRICITY  GENERATED  AND AVAILABLE FOR ALLOCATION TO SUBSCRIBERS SHALL BE
 DETERMINED BY A PRODUCTION METER INSTALLED AND PAID FOR BY THE SUBSCRIB-
 ER ORGANIZATION THAT IS THE OWNER OF THE SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILI-
 TY.
  3. PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO SUBSCRIBERS, SUBSCRIBER ORGANIZATIONS  AND
 SUBSCRIPTIONS.  (A)  A  SUBSCRIBER ORGANIZATION SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
 PROVIDING TO THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION, AT THE BEGINNING OF EACH  BILLING
 CYCLE,  A  SUBSCRIBER  AGREEMENT  STATEMENT  IDENTIFYING  THE PORTION OF
 PRODUCTION ALLOCATED TO EACH SUBSCRIBER.  SUBSCRIBER  ORGANIZATIONS  MAY
 ADD  NEW  SUBSCRIBERS TO A SUBSCRIBER AGREEMENT OR CHANGE THE INDIVIDUAL
 METERED ACCOUNTS TO WHICH A SUBSCRIBER'S SUBSCRIPTION  SHALL  BE  ATTRI-
 BUTED  AT  THE  BEGINNING  OF EACH BILLING CYCLE BY PROVIDING AN UPDATED
 SUBSCRIBER AGREEMENT TO THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION. IF THERE HAS  BEEN  NO
 CHANGE  IN  THE ALLOCATIONS FROM THE PREVIOUS SUBMISSION, THE SUBSCRIBER
 ORGANIZATION IS NOT REQUIRED TO FILE AN UPDATED SUBSCRIBER AGREEMENT.
  (B) AN ELECTRIC CORPORATION MAY REQUIRE THAT  CUSTOMERS  PARTICIPATING
 IN A SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY HAVE THEIR METERS READ ON THE SAME
 BILLING CYCLE.
  (C)  THE  DISPUTE  RESOLUTION  PROCEDURES  AVAILABLE TO PARTIES IN THE
 ELECTRIC CORPORATION'S INTERCONNECTION TARIFF SHALL BE AVAILABLE FOR THE
 PURPOSES OF RESOLVING  DISPUTES  BETWEEN  AN  ELECTRIC  CORPORATION  AND
 SUBSCRIBERS  OR  THEIR  DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE FOR DISPUTES INVOLVING
 THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION'S ALLOCATION OF BILL CREDITS TO  THE  SUBSCRIB-
 ER'S ELECTRIC ACCOUNT. THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION SHALL NOT BE RESPONSIBLE
 FOR  RESOLVING  DISPUTES RELATED TO THE AGREEMENTS BETWEEN A SUBSCRIBER,
 THE OWNER OF A SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY  THAT  IS  A  SUBSCRIBER
 ORGANIZATION  OR  ANY  OTHER PARTY. THIS PROVISION SHALL IN NO WAY LIMIT
 ANY OTHER RIGHTS THE SUBSCRIBER MAY HAVE RELATED TO AN  ELECTRIC  CORPO-
 RATION'S  PROVISION OF ELECTRIC SERVICE OR OTHER MATTERS AS PROVIDED BY,
 BUT NOT LIMITED TO, TARIFF, DECISION OF THE COMMISSION, OR STATUTE.
  (D) THE FOLLOWING PROVISIONS MAY APPLY TO A  SHARED  RENEWABLE  ENERGY
 FACILITY  THAT  HAS A RATED CAPACITY OF NOT MORE THAN TWO THOUSAND KILO-
 WATTS, BASED UPON AN EVALUATION AND FINDING OF PUBLIC INTEREST AS DETER-
 A. 3266  4
 
 MINED BY A STAKEHOLDER PROCESS THROUGH A PROCEEDING TO BE ESTABLISHED BY
 THE COMMISSION:
  (I)  SUBSCRIBERS  SHALL  NOT BE ASSESSED STANDBY CHARGES ON THE SHARED
 RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY OR THE  KILOWATT-HOUR  GENERATION  OF  SUCH  A
 SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY.
  (II)  AN  ELECTRIC  CORPORATION  SHALL  IMPOSE NO OTHER CHARGE OR FEE,
 INCLUDING BACK-UP, STANDBY AND DEMAND CHARGES, FOR THE  PROVISION  OF  A
 SUBSCRIPTION TO SUCH A SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY.
  4.  BILL  CREDITING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES. (A) THE ELECTRIC CORPO-
 RATION WILL CREDIT THE ACCOUNTS OF THE SUBSCRIBERS OF THE SHARED RENEWA-
 BLE ENERGY FACILITY BY APPLYING A BILL CREDIT TO  EACH  METERED  ACCOUNT
 ASSOCIATED  WITH  A  SUBSCRIPTION  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH THE TERMS OF THE
 SUBSCRIBER AGREEMENT. THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION SHALL CARRY OVER ANY BILL
 CREDIT EARNED BY A SUBSCRIBER AND NOT USED IN THE CURRENT BILLING PERIOD
 TO OFFSET THE SUBSCRIBER'S CONSUMPTION IN  SUBSEQUENT  BILLING  PERIODS.
 ANY SUCH BILL CREDIT SHALL NOT REDUCE ANY FIXED MONTHLY CUSTOMER CHARGES
 IMPOSED BY THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION.
  (B)  THE  SCHEDULE APPLICABLE TO A SUBSCRIBER SHALL BE IDENTICAL, WITH
 RESPECT TO RATE STRUCTURE, ALL RETAIL RATE COMPONENTS, AND  ANY  MONTHLY
 CHARGES,  TO  THE  CHARGES  THAT THE SUBSCRIBER WOULD BE ASSIGNED IF THE
 SUBSCRIBER DID NOT RECEIVE A BILL CREDIT ACCORDING TO THIS SECTION.
  (C) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE,  ELECTRIC  CORPORATIONS  SHALL  UTILIZE
 EXISTING  ELECTRONIC  DATA  INTERCHANGE INFRASTRUCTURE OR OTHER EXISTING
 BILLING INFRASTRUCTURE TO IMPLEMENT THEIR BILLING AND COLLECTION RESPON-
 SIBILITIES UNDER THIS SECTION.
  (D) THE COMMISSION SHALL  ENSURE  FULL  AND  TIMELY  RECOVERY  OF  ALL
 REASONABLE  COSTS  INCURRED  BY AN ELECTRIC CORPORATION TO IMPLEMENT THE
 PROGRAM UNDER THIS SECTION, INCLUDING REASONABLE EXPENSES FOR CHANGES TO
 THEIR BILLING SYSTEM AND HANDLING OF COLLECTIONS,  AND  SHALL  DETERMINE
 THE APPROPRIATE METHOD OF ALLOCATING THOSE COSTS.
  5. CALCULATION OF BILL CREDITS. (A) FOR SUBSCRIBERS TO A SHARED RENEW-
 ABLE ENERGY FACILITY THAT ARE LOCATED ON THE SAME DISTRIBUTION FEEDER AS
 THE SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY, THE VALUE OF THE BILL CREDIT SHALL
 BE  CALCULATED  BY MULTIPLYING THE SUBSCRIBER'S PORTION OF THE KILOWATT-
 HOUR ELECTRICITY PRODUCTION FROM THE SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY BY
 THE RETAIL RATE AS CHARGED TO THE  SUBSCRIBER  BY  THE  ELECTRIC  CORPO-
 RATION;
  (B)  THE  COMMISSION,  IN  CONSULTATION  WITH  NEW  YORK  STATE ENERGY
 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY, MAY REVISE THE  BILL  CREDIT  CALCU-
 LATION METHODOLOGY AT ANY TIME THAT IT CONCLUDES THAT THE EXISTING METH-
 ODOLOGY  DOES NOT PROVIDE SUBSCRIBERS WITH THE FAIR VALUE OF ELECTRICITY
 AND OTHER BENEFITS PRODUCED BY SHARED RENEWABLE  ENERGY  FACILITIES  AND
 THAT  SUCH  A  REVISION  IS  IN  THE PUBLIC INTEREST, AS DETERMINED BY A
 STAKEHOLDER PROCESS THROUGH  A  PROCEEDING  TO  BE  ESTABLISHED  BY  THE
 COMMISSION.  ANY  REVISION  TO  THE  BILL CREDIT CALCULATION METHODOLOGY
 SHALL APPLY TO NEW SHARED  RENEWABLE  ENERGY  FACILITIES  INTERCONNECTED
 AFTER THE COMMISSION ADOPTS A NEW METHODOLOGY. 
  6.  CONDITIONS  OF  SERVICE. (A) AN ELECTRIC CORPORATION SHALL PROVIDE
 FOR THE INTERCONNECTION OF SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITIES  OWNED  OR
 OPERATED BY A SUBSCRIBER ORGANIZATION, PROVIDED THE SUBSCRIBER ORGANIZA-
 TION HAS PAID OR AGREED IN WRITING, ALONG WITH THE FURNISHING OF REASON-
 ABLE  SECURITY,  TO  PAY  THE  ELECTRIC CORPORATION FOR THE MATERIAL AND
 INSTALLATION COSTS RELATING TO  ANY  PORTION  OF  A  DISTRIBUTION  LINE,
 SERVICE  LINE  AND APPURTENANT FACILITIES THAT EXCEEDS THE PORTION WHICH
 THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION IS REQUIRED TO  PROVIDE  WITHOUT  CONTRIBUTION,
 WHICH  COSTS  SHALL BE DEFINED IN THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION'S TARIFF, AND
 A. 3266  5
 
 THAT THE SUBSCRIBER ORGANIZATION ENTERS INTO A CONTRACT WITH THE  CORPO-
 RATION  OR  COMPLIES  WITH  THE  CORPORATION'S  APPLICABLE  SCHEDULE AND
 COMPLIES WITH STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SECTION.
  (B)  ON  OR  BEFORE  THREE  MONTHS  AFTER  THE  EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS
 SECTION, EACH ELECTRIC CORPORATION SHALL DEVELOP A  MODEL  CONTRACT  AND
 FILE  A SCHEDULE THAT ESTABLISHES CONSISTENT AND REASONABLE RATES, TERMS
 AND CONDITIONS FOR SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITIES, ACCORDING TO  THE
 REQUIREMENTS  OF  THIS  SECTION.  THE COMMISSION SHALL RENDER A DECISION
 WITHIN THREE MONTHS FROM THE DATE ON WHICH THE SCHEDULE IS FILED.
  (C) IN THE EVENT THAT THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION DETERMINES THAT  IT  IS
 NECESSARY  TO  INSTALL A DEDICATED TRANSFORMER OR TRANSFORMERS, OR OTHER
 EQUIPMENT TO  PROTECT  THE  SAFETY  AND  ADEQUACY  OF  ELECTRIC  SERVICE
 PROVIDED  TO  OTHER  CUSTOMERS,  A SUBSCRIBER ORGANIZATION SHALL PAY THE
 ELECTRIC CORPORATION'S ACTUAL COSTS OF  INSTALLING  THE  TRANSFORMER  OR
 TRANSFORMERS,  OR  OTHER  EQUIPMENT AS DETERMINED BY THE ELECTRIC CORPO-
 RATION SUBJECT TO REVIEW, UPON REQUEST OF SUCH SUBSCRIBER  ORGANIZATION,
 BY THE COMMISSION.
  (D)  ON  OR  BEFORE  THREE  MONTHS  AFTER  THE  EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS
 SECTION, EACH ELECTRIC CORPORATION SHALL ESTABLISH  STANDARDS  THAT  ARE
 NECESSARY FOR SHARED RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITIES AND THE INTERCONNECTION
 OF  SHARED  RENEWABLE ENERGY GENERATING EQUIPMENT TO ITS SYSTEM AND THAT
 THE COMMISSION SHALL DETERMINE  ARE  NECESSARY  FOR  SAFE  AND  ADEQUATE
 SERVICE  AND  FURTHER  THE PUBLIC POLICY SET FORTH IN THIS SECTION. SUCH
 STANDARDS MAY INCLUDE, BUT SHALL NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (I) EQUIPMENT NECESSARY TO ISOLATE AUTOMATICALLY THE ENERGY GENERATING
 EQUIPMENT FROM THE UTILITY SYSTEM FOR VOLTAGE AND FREQUENCY  DEVIATIONS;
 AND
  (II)  A  MANUAL  LOCKABLE DISCONNECT SWITCH PROVIDED BY THE SUBSCRIBER
 ORGANIZATION WHICH SHALL BE EXTERNALLY ACCESSIBLE  FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF
 ISOLATING THE ENERGY GENERATING EQUIPMENT.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.