# Relates to appointments to the water board of the city of New York

**Bill ID:** A1011
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** David Weprin
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A1011 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A1011)

## Summary

Relates to appointments to the water board of the city of New York.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1011
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. WEPRIN -- Multi-Sponsored by -- M. of A. AUBRY,
  BENEDETTO -- read once and referred to the Committee on  Corporations,
  Authorities and Commissions
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the public authorities law, in relation to the city of
  New York water board

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Subdivision 2 of section 1045-f of the public authorities
 law, as added by chapter 513 of the laws of 1984, is amended to read  as
 follows:
  2.  (A) The water board shall consist of seven members TO BE appointed
 [by the mayor.] AS FOLLOWS:
  (I) THREE MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE MAYOR;
  (II) THREE MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL; AND
  (III) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK.
  (B) Terms of office of the members shall be two years except that  the
 terms of four of the board members first appointed shall be one year. At
 least  one member shall have experience in the science of water resource
 development. No member shall be a director of the authority.  [The mayor
 shall appoint a chairman from among  the  members  of  the  board.]  THE
 CHAIRMAN  SHALL  BE DULY ELECTED BY THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD, SUBJECT TO
 THE SAME QUORUM AND VOTING REQUIREMENTS AS PROVIDED FOR  IN  SUBDIVISION
 SEVEN  OF  THIS SECTION. All members shall continue to hold office until
 their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be  filled
 in  the  manner provided for original appointments. Vacancies, occurring
 otherwise than by expiration of term of office, shall be filled  in  the
 same manner as original appointments for the unexpired terms.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01250-01-3