# Restricts electioneering on the polling place property

**Bill ID:** A1206
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Kenneth Zebrowski
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [A1206 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A1206)

## Summary

Restricts electioneering on polling place property.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1206
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. ZEBROWSKI, SAYEGH, GUNTHER, REYES, TAYLOR, STERN,
  SIMON,  FAHY,  RAMOS,  BENEDETTO, MAGNARELLI, SEAWRIGHT -- Multi-Spon-
  sored by -- M. of A. DICKENS -- read once and referred to the  Commit-
  tee on Election Law
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the election law, in relation to restricting electio-
  neering on polling place property

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  This  act shall be known and may be cited as the "vote in
 peace act".
  ยง 2. Subdivision 1 of section 8-104 of the election law, as amended by
 chapter 232 of the laws of 2020, is amended to read as follows:
  1. The American flag shall be kept displayed  at  each  polling  place
 throughout  the  election.  Facsimile ballots, voter information posting
 and distance markers shall not be taken down, torn or defaced during the
 election. While the polls are open no person shall do any electioneering
 within the polling place, ON THE  POLLING  PLACE  PROPERTY,  or  in  any
 public  street,  within  a  one  hundred  foot  radial measured from the
 entrances designated by the inspectors  of  election,  to  such  polling
 place  or  within  such distance in any place in a public manner; and no
 political banner, button, poster or placard shall be allowed in or  upon
 the  polling  place  or  within  such one hundred foot radial. While the
 polls are open no person shall consume any  alcoholic  beverages  within
 the  polling  place.  While the polls are open no person shall make any
 change, alteration or modification to any entrance to or exit  from  the
 polling  place unless such change, alteration or modification allows for
 increased access for persons with disabilities or is necessary to  main-
 tain  public  safety  due  to  the  occurrence of an emergency. Any such
 change, alteration or modification shall be clearly  marked  on  signage
 placed adjacent to the former entrance or exit.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03220-01-3