# Requires notice to unemployment applicants of the supplemental nutrition assistance program and WIC

**Bill ID:** A1245AA
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Linda Rosenthal
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A1245A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A1245A)

## Summary

Requires notice to unemployment applicants of the supplemental nutrition assistance program and special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants and children (WIC).

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1245--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. L. ROSENTHAL -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Labor --  committee  discharged,  bill  amended,  ordered
  reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN  ACT to amend the labor law, in relation to providing notice to unem-
  ployment applicants of the supplemental nutrition  assistance  program
  and  special  supplemental  nutrition  program  for women, infants and
  children
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Section 540 of the labor law, as amended by chapter 251 of
 the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 540. Information about [food stamp utility, and rental and mortgage]
 assistance programs. The commissioner shall establish procedures whereby
 each person who files a claim for  unemployment  insurance  pursuant  to
 section  five hundred ninety-six of this article, shall receive informa-
 tion about the [food stamp] SUPPLEMENTAL  NUTRITION  ASSISTANCE  program
 provided  by  the office of temporary and disability assistance pursuant
 to subdivision six of section ninety-five-a of the social services  law,
 THE  SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION PROGRAM FOR WOMEN, INFANTS AND CHIL-
 DREN PROVIDED BY THE DEPARTMENT  OF  HEALTH  UNDER  SECTION  TWENTY-FIVE
 HUNDRED  SEVEN  OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH LAW, and the utility assistance and
 rental and mortgage assistance programs available through  the  division
 of  housing  and community renewal and the office of temporary and disa-
 bility assistance. The commissioner shall also provide information about
 such programs on the department's website.  Such  information  shall  be
 prominently  displayed  and  easily  accessible  by individuals filing a
 claim or certifying for unemployment benefits.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it shall have become a law.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04244-06-3