# Provides taxpayer gifts for the cure childhood cancer research fund

**Bill ID:** A1302
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Linda Rosenthal
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A1302 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A1302)

## Summary

Requires the commissioner of taxation and finance to include space on the personal income tax return to enable a taxpayer to make a contribution to the cure childhood cancer research fund.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1302
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. L. ROSENTHAL -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Ways and Means
 
 AN ACT to amend the tax law and the state finance law,  in  relation  to
  providing taxpayer gifts for the cure childhood cancer research fund
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The tax law is amended by adding a  new  section  630-l  to
 read as follows:
  ยง  630-L.  GIFT FOR CURE CHILDHOOD CANCER RESEARCH FUND. EFFECTIVE FOR
 ANY TAX YEAR COMMENCING ON OR AFTER JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND  TWENTY-
 FOUR, A TAXPAYER IN ANY TAXABLE YEAR MAY ELECT TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE CURE
 CHILDHOOD  CANCER  RESEARCH FUND ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO SECTION NINETY-
 NINE-Z OF THE STATE FINANCE LAW. SUCH CONTRIBUTION SHALL BE IN ANY WHOLE
 DOLLAR AMOUNT AND SHALL NOT REDUCE THE AMOUNT OF STATE TAX OWED BY  SUCH
 TAXPAYER.  THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL INCLUDE SPACE ON THE PERSONAL INCOME
 TAX RETURN TO ENABLE A TAXPAYER TO MAKE SUCH CONTRIBUTION. NOTWITHSTAND-
 ING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, ALL REVENUES COLLECTED PURSUANT TO  THIS
 SECTION SHALL BE CREDITED TO THE CURE CHILDHOOD CANCER RESEARCH FUND AND
 USED  ONLY FOR THOSE PURPOSES ENUMERATED IN SECTION NINETY-NINE-Z OF THE
 STATE FINANCE LAW.
  ยง 2. Subdivision 2 of section 99-z of the state finance law, as  added
 by chapter 443 of the laws of 2016, is amended to read as follows:
  2.  Such  fund  shall consist of all revenues received pursuant to the
 provisions of section four hundred four-cc of the  vehicle  and  traffic
 law, ALL THE REVENUES RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION AND FINANCE
 PURSUANT  TO  SECTION  SIX HUNDRED THIRTY-L OF THE TAX LAW and all other
 moneys appropriated, credited or transferred thereto from any other fund
 or source pursuant to law. Nothing contained herein  shall  prevent  the
 state  from  receiving grants, gifts or bequests for the purposes of the
 fund as defined in this  section  and  depositing  them  into  the  fund
 according to law.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately and shall apply to all tax
 years commencing on and after January 1, 2024.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05075-01-3