# Relates to available transportation for correction facility visitation

**Bill ID:** A131
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Catalina Cruz
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A131 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A131)

## Summary

Relates to available transportation for correction facility visitation; provides for at a minimum, bi-monthly free transportation from the city of New York, Rochester, Syracuse, Buffalo and Albany.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  131
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. CRUZ -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Correction
 
 AN ACT to amend the correction law, in relation to available transporta-
  tion for correction facility visitation
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The correction law is amended by adding a new section 138-b
 to read as follows:
  ยง  138-B. VISITOR TRANSPORTATION. IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE INCARCERATED
 INDIVIDUAL VISITING PROGRAM, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE TRANSPORTATION
 FOR VISITORS TO CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES ON A REGULAR BASIS, BUT NO  LESS
 THAN BIMONTHLY, AT NO COST TO VISITORS. TRANSPORTATION SHALL BE PROVIDED
 FROM  THE  CITY  OF NEW YORK, ROCHESTER, SYRACUSE, BUFFALO AND ALBANY TO
 CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES, AS DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER.  INFORMATION
 CONCERNING  TRANSPORTATION  SHALL  BE  POSTED ON THE DEPARTMENT'S PUBLIC
 WEBSITE, AND SHALL BE AVAILABLE FROM THE  TELEPHONE  NUMBER  DESIGNATED,
 PURSUANT  TO  SECTION ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-EIGHT-A OF THIS ARTICLE. NOTICE
 OF AVAILABLE TRANSPORTATION SHALL BE PROVIDED TO  INCARCERATED  INDIVID-
 UALS UPON RECEPTION AND UPON TRANSFER TO A NEW CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.
  ยง  2. This act shall take effect one year after it shall have become a
 law.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02107-01-3