# Authorizes the New York city council to approve or deny by a majority vote, any public authority's or public benefit corporation's use of eminent domain

**Bill ID:** A1406
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Robert C. Carroll
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A1406 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A1406)

## Summary

Authorizes the New York city council to approve or deny by a majority vote, any public authority's or public benefit corporation's use of eminent domain.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1406
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. CARROLL -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the public authorities law, in relation  to  authorizing
  the New York city council to approve or disapprove by a majority vote,
  any  public authority's or public benefit corporation's use of eminent
  domain

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  title  heading of title 6 of article 9 of the public
 authorities law, as added by chapter 307 of the laws of  1964  and  such
 title as renumbered by chapter 838 of the laws of 1983, is amended and a
 new section 2901 is added to read as follows:
  EMINENT DOMAIN TAKING; PROPERTY OF OR BY A PUBLIC
  BENEFIT CORPORATION
  ยง 2901. EMINENT DOMAIN; CERTAIN CITIES. IN CITIES WITH A POPULATION OF
 ONE  MILLION  OR  MORE  IN  WHICH  ANY  PART  OF THE REAL PROPERTY TO BE
 ACQUIRED IS LOCATED, THE  CITY  COUNCIL  SHALL  HAVE  THE  AUTHORITY  TO
 APPROVE  OR  DISAPPROVE  ANY PUBLIC AUTHORITY'S OR PUBLIC BENEFIT CORPO-
 RATION'S USE OF EMINENT DOMAIN. THE CITY COUNCIL SHALL APPROVE OR DISAP-
 PROVE ANY PROPOSED USE OF THE POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN BY MAJORITY  VOTE.
 PRIOR  TO  SUCH VOTE, SUCH CITY COUNCIL SHALL HOLD AT LEAST ONE OFFICIAL
 PUBLIC HEARING ON SUCH MATTER AT A LOCATION REASONABLY PROXIMATE TO  THE
 PROPERTY WHICH MAY BE ACQUIRED.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03479-01-3