# Authorizes Medicaid coverage to disabled persons attending an out-of-state college or university who are in need of continuous medical care

**Bill ID:** A1450
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Linda Rosenthal
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A1450 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A1450)

## Summary

Authorizes Medicaid coverage to a disabled person attending an out-of-state college or university who is in need of continuous medical care and is a domiciliary of the state of New York; authorizes continuous coverage for services and care such person received while in-state; requires persons eligible for the provisions of this section must show proof of enrollment every semester.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1450
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. L. ROSENTHAL, WEPRIN -- read once and referred to
  the Committee on Health
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  social services law, in relation to authorizing
  Medicaid  coverage  to  disabled  persons  attending  an  out-of-state
  college or university who are in need of continuous medical care

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section  366 of the social  services  law  is  amended  by
 adding a new subdivision 16 to read as follows:
  16. (A) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY INCONSISTENT PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER OR
 ANY  OTHER  PROVISION OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY, A DISABLED PERSON SHALL BE
 ELIGIBLE FOR MEDICAL ASSISTANCE WHERE HE OR SHE IS ATTENDING  A  COLLEGE
 OR  UNIVERSITY  OUTSIDE OF THE STATE AND SUCH PERSON REQUIRES CONTINUOUS
 MEDICAL CARE AND IS A DOMICILIARY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
  (B) DISABLED PERSONS SHALL CONTINUE TO RECEIVE MEDICAL ASSISTANCE  FOR
 SERVICES  AND CARE THEY RECEIVED WHILE IN THE STATE IF SUCH SERVICES AND
 CARE ARE NEEDED WHILE ATTENDING AN OUT-OF-STATE COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY.
  (C) PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR THE  PROVISIONS  OF  THIS  SUBDIVISION  SHALL
 PROVIDE  TO THEIR LOCAL DEPARTMENT  OF SOCIAL SERVICES, PROOF OF ENROLL-
 MENT EVERY SEMESTER IN THE OUT-OF-STATE COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY.
  (D) FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SUBDIVISION:
  (1) "DOMICILIARY" SHALL MEAN A PERSON WHOSE  DOMICILE  IS  WITHIN  THE
 STATE OF NEW YORK.
  (2)  "DOMICILE"  SHALL  MEAN  A FIXED, PERMANENT AND PRINCIPAL HOME TO
 WHICH A PERSON WHEREVER TEMPORARILY LOCATED ALWAYS INTENDS TO RETURN.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01315-01-3