# Relates to requiring the department of education to provide school districts with a list of resources and instructional materials on media literacy

**Bill ID:** A1452
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Nily Rozic
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A1452 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A1452)

## Summary

Relates to requiring the department of education to provide school districts with a list of resources and instructional materials on media literacy; defines terms.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1452
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. ROZIC -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to requiring the  depart-
  ment of education to provide school districts with a list of resources
  and instructional materials on media literacy

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 756 to
 read as follows:
  ยง 756. MEDIA LITERACY MATERIALS. 1. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS  SECTION,
 THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  A.  "DIGITAL  CITIZENSHIP"  MEANS  A  DIVERSE SET OF SKILLS RELATED TO
 CURRENT TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEDIA, INCLUDING THE NORMS OF APPROPRIATE,
 RESPONSIBLE, AND HEALTHY BEHAVIOR.
  B. "MEDIA LITERACY" MEANS THE ABILITY TO  ACCESS,  ANALYZE,  EVALUATE,
 AND  USE  MEDIA  AND  ENCOMPASSES  THE  FOUNDATIONAL SKILLS THAT LEAD TO
 DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP.
  2. ON OR BEFORE JULY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR,  THE  DEPARTMENT
 SHALL  MAKE AVAILABLE TO SCHOOL DISTRICTS ON ITS INTERNET WEBSITE A LIST
 OF RESOURCES AND INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS ON  MEDIA  LITERACY,  INCLUDING
 MEDIA LITERACY PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS FOR TEACHERS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04934-01-3