# Requires the mobilization of the New York guard for certain power outages and requires power outage restoration training for members of the New York guard

**Bill ID:** A1508
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Linda Rosenthal
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A1508 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A1508)

## Summary

Requires the mobilization of the New York guard for certain power outages; requires power outage restoration training for members of the New York guard.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1508
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. L. ROSENTHAL -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Corporations, Authorities and Commissions
 
 AN ACT to amend the public service law, in  relation  to  requiring  the
  mobilization  of  the New York guard for certain power outages; and to
  amend the military law, in relation to requiring power outage restora-
  tion training for members of the New York guard
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The public service law is amended by adding a new section
 73-b to read as follows:
  ยง 73-B. POWER OUTAGES; MOBILIZATION OF NEW YORK GUARD. 1. THE GOVERNOR
 IS DIRECTED TO MOBILIZE THE NEW YORK GUARD WHEN ANY POWER OUTAGE  OCCURS
 IN  THIS  STATE  WHERE A TOTAL OF TWENTY-FIVE THOUSAND OR MORE CUSTOMERS
 REMAIN WITHOUT POWER IN ANY GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF THIS STATE AFTER  TWENTY-
 FOUR HOURS FROM THE TIME THE POWER OUTAGE FIRST OCCURRED.
  2. THE PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE OF THE MOBILIZATION OF THE NEW YORK GUARD
 PURSUANT  TO  THIS  SECTION  SHALL  BE TO RESTORE AND AID PUBLIC UTILITY
 CORPORATIONS IN THIS STATE IN THE RESTORATION  OF  POWER  TO  HOMES  AND
 BUSINESSES.  SUCH MOBILIZATION SHALL INITIALLY CONCENTRATE ON THE RESTO-
 RATION OF POWER IN AREAS WITH A HIGH  CONCENTRATION  OF  OVERHEAD  POWER
 LINES AS DETERMINED BY THE GOVERNOR.
  3. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL REQUIRE THAT THE COST OF TRAINING MEMBERS OF
 THE  NEW YORK GUARD TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION PURSUANT
 TO SECTION ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY-ONE OF THE MILITARY LAW BE BORNE  COLLEC-
 TIVELY BY PUBLIC UTILITY CORPORATIONS IN THIS STATE.
  ยง  2.  The military law is amended by adding a new section 171 to read
 as follows:
  ยง 171. TRAINING; RESTORATION OF POWER. EACH MEMBER  OF  THE  NEW  YORK
 GUARD SHALL BE REQUIRED TO COMPLETE TRAINING IN THE RESTORATION OF POWER
 TO  HOMES  AND  BUSINESSES,  ELECTRICAL  POWER GRID MAINTENANCE AND TREE
 REMOVAL FOR THE PURPOSE OF CARRYING OUT THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION SEVEN-
 TY-THREE-B OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE LAW.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03750-01-3