# Creates the office of expungement

**Bill ID:** A1607
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Khaleel Anderson
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A1607 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A1607)

## Summary

Creates the office of expungement within the division of criminal justice services to oversee the sealing and expungement of certain convictions.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1607
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. ANDERSON, REYES, GONZALEZ-ROJAS, SIMON, FORREST
  -- read once and referred to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive  law,  in  relation  to  establishing  the
  office of expungement within the division of criminal justice services
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The executive law is amended by adding a new section  837-x
 to read as follows:
  ยง  837-X.  OFFICE  OF  EXPUNGEMENT.  1.  DEFINITIONS.  AS  USED IN THE
 SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  (A) "ELIGIBLE CONVICTION" SHALL MEAN A CONVICTION WHICH IS ELIGIBLE TO
 BE SEALED AND/OR EXPUNGED UNDER SECTION 160.50, 160.55,  160.57,  160.58
 OR 160.59 OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE LAW.
  (B)  "OFFICE"  SHALL  MEAN THE OFFICE OF EXPUNGEMENT AS ESTABLISHED BY
 THIS SECTION.
  2. ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE. THERE IS  HEREBY  ESTABLISHED  WITHIN  THE
 DIVISION  OF  CRIMINAL  JUSTICE SERVICES THE OFFICE OF EXPUNGEMENT WHICH
 SHALL  OVERSEE  THE  SEALING  AND/OR  EXPUNGEMENT  OF  ALL  ELIGIBLE
 CONVICTIONS.
  3. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. THE OFFICE SHALL:
  (A)  INFORM THE DEFENDANT AND SUCH DEFENDANT'S ATTORNEY THAT AN ELIGI-
 BLE CONVICTION CAN BE SEALED AND/OR EXPUNGED;
  (B) ENSURE ALL ELIGIBLE CONVICTIONS ARE SEALED AND/OR  EXPUNGED  ACCU-
 RATELY AND IN A TIMELY MANNER;
  (C) ACT AS AN ADVOCATE FOR THOSE WITH ELIGIBLE CONVICTIONS TO GET SUCH
 CONVICTIONS SEALED AND/OR EXPUNGED;
  (D)  ADVISE  THE  GOVERNOR AND THE LEGISLATURE ON THE IMPACT OF HAVING
 ELIGIBLE CONVICTIONS SEALED AND/OR EXPUNGED; AND
  (E) DEVELOP STANDARDS, GUIDELINES, AND  BEST  PRACTICES  FOR  ENSURING
 ACCURATE AND TIMELY SEALING AND/OR EXPUNGEMENT OF ELIGIBLE CONVICTIONS.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03159-01-3
 A. 1607  2
 
  4.  OTHER  STATE  AGENCIES SHALL PROVIDE COOPERATION AND ASSISTANCE TO
 THE OFFICE SO AS TO ASSIST  IT  IN  THE  EFFECTIVE  PERFORMANCE  OF  ITS
 DUTIES.
  ยง  2.  This  act  shall  take  effect on the same date and in the same
 manner as a chapter of the laws of 2023 amending the criminal  procedure
 law,  the executive law and the correction law, in relation to automatic
 sealing of certain convictions, as proposed in legislative  bill  number
 S. 211, takes effect.