# Creates the crime of environmental damage of property

**Bill ID:** A1603
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** David Weprin
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A1603 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A1603)

## Summary

Creates the crime of environmental damage of property.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1603
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. WEPRIN -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Codes
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  penal law, in relation to creating the crime of
  environmental damage of property
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 145.24 to
 read as follows:
 ยง 145.24 ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE OF PROPERTY.
  1. A PERSON IS GUILTY OF ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE OF PROPERTY WHEN, IN THE
 COURSE OF THE COMMISSION OF ANOTHER FELONY ACT, HE OR SHE  INTENTIONALLY
 OR  RECKLESSLY  CAUSES  ANY  PROPERTY  DAMAGE  THAT  ALTERS, DILUTES, OR
 DESTROYS WATER, SOIL, OR AIR, AND SUCH DAMAGE  NECESSITATES  REMEDIATION
 COSTS IN EXCESS OF ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS.
  2.  IT  SHALL  BE AN AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE TO THE CRIME OF ENVIRONMENTAL
 DAMAGE OF PROPERTY THAT THE DEFENDANT  WAS  ACTING  UNDER  A  REASONABLE
 BELIEF  THAT  HE  OR  SHE HAD A RIGHT TO ALTER, DILUTE OR DESTROY DUE TO
 LICENSE AND/OR OWNERSHIP OF SAID PROPERTY, OR THAT  THE  UNDERLYING  ACT
 WAS NOT A VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
  ENVIRONMENTAL  DAMAGE  OF  PROPERTY  IS A CLASS C FELONY. ANY SENTENCE
 IMPOSED PURSUANT TO A CONVICTION UNDER THIS  SECTION  IS  TO  BE  SERVED
 CONSECUTIVE TO ANY SENTENCE IMPOSED FOR THE UNDERLYING FELONY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01515-01-3