# Relates to domestic violence training for health and mental health professionals

**Bill ID:** A405
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Karen McMahon
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A405 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A405)

## Summary

Relates to domestic violence training for health and mental health professionals; requires such trainings to be updated annually by the office for the prevention of domestic violence; requires the office to collect data on participation of such trainings by health professionals.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  405
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 9, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. McMAHON -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law,  in  relation  to  domestic  violence
  training for health and mental health professionals
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 575 of the executive law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 11 to read as follows:
  11. HEALTH AND MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL  TRAINING.  (A)  THE  OFFICE
 SHALL  ENSURE  THAT  THE TRAININGS DEVELOPED AND DELIVERED TO HEALTH AND
 MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS PURSUANT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II)  OF  PARAGRAPH
 (C)  OF  SUBDIVISION THREE OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE REVIEWED AND UPDATED
 ANNUALLY. SUCH TRAININGS SHALL INCLUDE INSTRUCTIONS ON MANDATORY REPORT-
 ING OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE FOR HEALTH CARE WORKERS SUBJECT TO SUCH  MANDA-
 TORY REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
  (B)  THE  OFFICE  SHALL  CONVENE A TASK FORCE RESPONSIBLE FOR ENSURING
 THAT ALL HEALTH AND MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS IN THE STATE RECEIVE THE
 TRAININGS UNDER PARAGRAPH (A) OF THIS SUBDIVISION ON  AN  ANNUAL  BASIS.
 SUCH  TASK  FORCE SHALL COLLECT DATA ON THE PARTICIPATION OF SUCH TRAIN-
 INGS BY HEALTH AND MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS IN THE STATE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01410-01-3