# Relates to establishing animals as sentient beings

**Bill ID:** A41
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Linda Rosenthal
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A41 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A41)

## Summary

Establishes that animals are sentient beings capable of experiencing pain, stress, and fear and establishes an animal can be a victim of a crime.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  41
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. L. ROSENTHAL -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Agriculture
 
 AN ACT to amend the agriculture and markets law, in relation  to  estab-
  lishing animals as sentient beings
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The agriculture and markets law is amended by adding a  new
 section 385 to read as follows:
  ยง 385. ANIMALS AS SENTIENT BEINGS.  THE LEGISLATURE FINDS AND DECLARES
 THAT  ANIMALS  ARE SENTIENT BEINGS CAPABLE OF EXPERIENCING PAIN, STRESS,
 AND FEAR. IT IS THE POLICY OF NEW YORK THAT, IN ORDER TO PROTECT ANIMALS
 FROM EXPERIENCING PAIN, STRESS, OR FEAR AT HUMAN HANDS, ANIMALS  ARE  TO
 BE  TREATED  HUMANELY.  FOR THAT REASON, ANIMALS SHALL BE CONSIDERED THE
 VICTIMS OF ANIMAL CRUELTY CRIMES AND SHALL BE TREATED AS SUCH IN A COURT
 OF LAW.
  ยง 2.  This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01350-01-3