# Authorizes minors to operate temporary businesses without certain licenses or permits

**Bill ID:** A557
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Kenny Burgos
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [A557 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A557)

## Summary

Authorizes minors to operate temporary businesses operating for less than thirty days and generating less than five thousand dollars in profit per calendar year without certain licenses or permits; permits local government or law enforcement to require such temporary business to move if the location is determined to pose a substantial risk to health and safety.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  557
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 9, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. BURGOS -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Economic Development
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the general business law, in relation to authorizing
  minors to operate temporary businesses  without  certain  licenses  or
  permits
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The general business law is amended by adding a new section
 398-g to read as follows:
  ยง 398-G. TEMPORARY BUSINESSES OPERATED BY MINORS. 1. FOR THE  PURPOSES
 OF THIS SECTION:
  (A) "MINOR" SHALL MEAN AN INDIVIDUAL UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN.
  (B)  "TEMPORARY  BUSINESS"  SHALL  MEAN ANY BUSINESS THAT OPERATES FOR
 LESS THAN THIRTY DAYS AND GENERATES LESS THAN FIVE THOUSAND  DOLLARS  IN
 PROFIT IN A CALENDAR YEAR.
  2.  NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, RULE OR REGULATION TO
 THE CONTRARY, A MINOR SHALL NOT BE REQUIRED  TO  OBTAIN  ANY  PERMIT  OR
 LICENSE,  OTHER  THAN  A  LICENSE  REQUIRED BY ARTICLE FIVE, SIX, SIX-C,
 SIX-D, SEVEN, EIGHT-B, ELEVEN, FOURTEEN,  TWENTY-SEVEN,  TWENTY-SEVEN-A,
 TWENTY-EIGHT,  TWENTY-NINE-A, THIRTY-FIVE-C OR FORTY-ONE OF THIS CHAPTER
 OR A PROFESSIONAL LICENSE REQUIRED BY THE EDUCATION LAW  OR  THE  PUBLIC
 HEALTH LAW, TO OPERATE A TEMPORARY BUSINESS.
  3. THE LOCAL GOVERNING BODY OR THE LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OF THE
 CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE IN WHICH THE MINOR OPERATED TEMPORARY BUSINESS IS
 LOCATED  MAY  REQUIRE  SUCH MINOR TO MOVE THE LOCATION OF SUCH TEMPORARY
 BUSINESS IF SUCH LOCATION IS DETERMINED TO POSE A  SUBSTANTIAL  RISK  TO
 THE HEALTH AND SAFETY OF SUCH MINOR OR OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00618-01-3