# Limits a candidate to one authorized committee per election; defines "multi-candidate committee"; provides that such a committee may not be an authorized committee

**Bill ID:** A590
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Linda Rosenthal
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A590 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A590)

## Summary

Limits a candidate for public office to one authorized committee per election; defines the term "multi-candidate committee" and provides that such a committee may not be authorized by a candidate.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  590
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 9, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. L. ROSENTHAL -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Election Law
 
 AN ACT to amend the election law, in relation to limiting a candidate to
  one authorized committee per election, per office
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Section 14-100 of the election law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 1-a to read as follows:
  1-A. "MULTI-CANDIDATE COMMITTEE" MEANS A POLITICAL COMMITTEE WHICH HAS
 BEEN IN EXISTENCE FOR AT LEAST SIX MONTHS, HAS RECEIVED CONTRIBUTIONS OF
 MONEY FROM MORE THAN FIFTY PERSONS, HAS MADE CONTRIBUTIONS OF  MONEY  TO
 AT LEAST FIVE CANDIDATES IN NEW YORK STATE, MAKES ONLY MONETARY CONTRIB-
 UTIONS AND IS NOT AN AUTHORIZED COMMITTEE FOR ANY CANDIDATE.
  ยง  2.  Section  14-112 of the election law, as amended by section 8 of
 part A of chapter 286 of the  laws  of  2016,  is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  ยง  14-112.  Political committee authorization statement. Any political
 committee aiding or taking part in the election  or  nomination  of  any
 candidate,  other than [a political action committee] BY MAKING CONTRIB-
 UTIONS, shall file, in the  office  in  which  the  statements  of  such
 committee are to be filed pursuant to this article, either a sworn veri-
 fied statement by the treasurer of such committee AND THE CANDIDATE that
 [the]  SUCH  candidate  has authorized the political committee to aid or
 take part in his OR HER election or A SWORN VERIFIED  STATEMENT  BY  THE
 TREASURER  OF  SUCH  COMMITTEE that the candidate has not authorized the
 committee to aid or take part in his OR HER election.  NO CANDIDATE  MAY
 AUTHORIZE  MORE  THAN ONE COMMITTEE FOR ANY ONE ELECTION. A MULTI-CANDI-
 DATE COMMITTEE MAY NOT BE AN AUTHORIZED COMMITTEE.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00877-01-3