# Requires arrests be recorded or else such arrest is void and the defendant is discharged

**Bill ID:** A664
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Robert C. Carroll
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A664 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A664)

## Summary

Requires arrests be recorded or else such arrest is void and the defendant is discharged.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  664
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 11, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  CARROLL,  TAYLOR, SEAWRIGHT -- read once and
  referred to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the criminal procedure law,  in  relation  to  requiring
  arrests  be  recorded or else such arrest is void and the defendant is
  discharged
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Section 120.80 of the criminal procedure law is amended by
 adding a new subdivision 6 to read as follows:
  6. A WARRANT FOR ARREST SHALL NOT BE EXECUTED WITHOUT THE EXECUTION OF
 SUCH WARRANT BEING RECORDED  BY  A  FUNCTIONING  AND  UNOBSTRUCTED  BODY
 CAMERA  OR OTHER VIDEO RECORDING DEVICE. IF THE EXECUTION OF THE WARRANT
 IS NOT RECORDED ON VIDEO BY THE POLICE OFFICERS EXECUTING  THE  WARRANT,
 THE ARREST SHALL BE DEEMED VOID AND THE DEFENDANT SHALL BE DISCHARGED.
  ยง 2. Section 140.15 of the criminal procedure law is amended by adding
 a new subdivision 5 to read as follows:
  5. THE ARRESTING POLICE OFFICER SHALL RECORD SUCH ARREST USING A FUNC-
 TIONING AND UNOBSTRUCTED BODY CAMERA OR OTHER VIDEO RECORDING DEVICE. IF
 SUCH ARREST WAS NOT RECORDED ON VIDEO BY THE POLICE OFFICERS MAKING SUCH
 ARREST,  SUCH  ARREST  SHALL  BE  DEEMED VOID AND THE DEFENDANT SHALL BE
 DISCHARGED.
  ยง 3. Section 140.27 of the criminal procedure law is amended by adding
 a new subdivision 6 to read as follows:
  6. THE ARRESTING PEACE OFFICER SHALL RECORD SUCH ARREST USING A  FUNC-
 TIONING AND UNOBSTRUCTED BODY CAMERA OR OTHER VIDEO RECORDING DEVICE. IF
 SUCH  ARREST WAS NOT RECORDED ON VIDEO BY THE PEACE OFFICERS MAKING SUCH
 ARREST, SUCH ARREST SHALL BE DEEMED VOID  AND  THE  DEFENDANT  SHALL  BE
 DISCHARGED.
  ยง  4.  This  act shall take effect on the thirtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01082-01-3