# Relates to screening for gifted and talented students

**Bill ID:** A672
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Nily Rozic
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A672 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A672)

## Summary

Requires school districts to screen for gifted and talented students; provides the parents or guardians of such students the option to opt out of such screening.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  672
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 11, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. ROZIC, SEAWRIGHT -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Education
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  education  law, in relation to school districts
  screening for gifted and talented students
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 305 of the education law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 60 to read as follows:
  60.  A.  THE COMMISSIONER SHALL REQUIRE ALL SCHOOL DISTRICTS TO SCREEN
 FOR GIFTED AND TALENTED STUDENTS. SUCH STUDENTS SHALL BE SCREENED  PRIOR
 TO ENTERING THIRD GRADE.
  B.  SCHOOL  DISTRICTS  SHALL  PROVIDE NOTICE OF SUCH SCREENING TO EACH
 STUDENT AND TO THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN OF EACH STUDENT ENROLLED  IN  SUCH
 SCHOOL DISTRICT.  THE NOTICE SHALL:
  (I)  BE  PRINTED  IN A CLEAR AND CONSPICUOUS MANNER AND SHALL DESCRIBE
 SUCH SCREENING METHODS; AND
  (II) GIVE THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN OF SUCH STUDENT  THE  OPPORTUNITY  TO
 OPT OUT OF SUCH SCREENING BY CHECKING THE BOX "DO NOT SCREEN MY CHILD".
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02256-01-3