# Requires the board of regents to provide a live webcast of their meetings

**Bill ID:** A731
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Aileen Gunther
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A731 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A731)

## Summary

Requires that each meeting of the Board of Regents be streamed live and be made available to the public.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  731
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 11, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  GUNTHER,  OTIS, BUTTENSCHON -- read once and
  referred to the Committee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law,  in  relation  to  providing  a  live
  webcast for meetings of the board of regents
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section  204-a
 to read as follows:
  ยง  204-A. WEBCASTING MEETINGS. 1.  THE ENTIRETY OF EACH MEETING OF THE
 REGENTS SHALL BE LIVE WEBCAST AND BE MADE AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC ON THE
 DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE PRIOR TO THE START OF EACH MEETING, AND ARCHIVED ON
 THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE, FOR A PERIOD OF NO LESS THAN TWO YEARS, WITHIN
 TWENTY-FOUR HOURS OF THE ADJOURNMENT OF THE LAST MEETING.  THE  DEPART-
 MENT  SHALL  PROVIDE NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC, VIA THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE,
 OF THE AVAILABILITY OF THE LIVE WEBCAST OF SUCH MEETING.  THE  REQUIRE-
 MENT  TO  LIVE  WEBCAST  THE  ENTIRETY OF EACH MEETING SHALL NOT INCLUDE
 EXECUTIVE SESSIONS.
  2. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION THE TERM "MEETING"  SHALL  INCLUDE
 ANY  COMMITTEE,  SUBCOMMITTEE, AND TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, TASK FORCE
 OR SUBGROUP OF THE REGENTS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03012-01-3