# Provides for decarbonization plans for state-owned fleet vehicles; repealer

**Bill ID:** A993
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Patricia Fahy
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A993 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/A993)

## Summary

Directs each state agency to prepare a state fleet decarbonization plan for purchase or lease of state agency vehicles.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  993
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 12, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. FAHY -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Energy
 
 AN ACT to amend the state finance law, in  relation  to  decarbonization
  plans for state-owned fleet vehicles; and to repeal certain provisions
  of the executive law relating thereto
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 10 of section 201-a of the  executive  law,  as
 added by a chapter of the laws of 2022 amending the executive law relat-
 ing  to  the purchase or lease of zero emission vehicles for state-owned
 vehicle fleets, as proposed in legislative bills numbers S.  2838-C  and
 A. 2412-B, is REPEALED.
  ยง 2. The state finance law is amended by adding a new section 163-d to
 read as follows:
  ยง  163-D.  DECARBONIZATION  PLANS  FOR  STATE-OWNED FLEET VEHICLES. 1.
 EACH STATE AGENCY SHALL PREPARE A STATE FLEET DECARBONIZATION  PLAN  FOR
 PURCHASE  OR LEASE OF STATE AGENCY VEHICLES.  THE STATE FLEET DECARBONI-
 ZATION PLANS FOR LIGHT-DUTY NON-EMERGENCY VEHICLES SHALL BE PREPARED  ON
 OR  BEFORE  DECEMBER  THIRTY-FIRST,  TWO  THOUSAND TWENTY-THREE, AND THE
 STATE FLEET DECARBONIZATION PLANS FOR MEDIUM-  AND  HEAVY-DUTY  VEHICLES
 SHALL BE PREPARED ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER THIRTY-FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWEN-
 TY-FIVE.  SUCH  PLANS  SHALL INCLUDE INTERIM TARGETS FOR ACHIEVING FLEET
 DECARBONIZATION GOALS.
  2. ALL STATE AGENCY LIGHT-DUTY NON-EMERGENCY VEHICLES  SHALL  BE  ZERO
 EMISSION  VEHICLES  BY NO LATER THAN DECEMBER THIRTY-FIRST, TWO THOUSAND
 THIRTY-FIVE, AND ALL STATE AGENCY MEDIUM- AND HEAVY-DUTY  VEHICLES SHALL
 BE ZERO EMISSION VEHICLES BY NO LATER THAN  DECEMBER  THIRTY-FIRST,  TWO
 THOUSAND  FORTY,  UNLESS  A  ZERO EMISSION VEHICLE IS NOT FEASIBLE FOR A
 PARTICULAR  APPLICATION.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the  same  date  and  in  the  same
 manner  as  a  chapter  of  the  laws of 2022 amending the executive law
 relating to the purchase or lease of zero emission vehicles  for  state-
 owned vehicle fleets, as proposed in legislative bills numbers S. 2838-C
 and A. 2412-B, takes effect.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04218-01-3