# Requires landlords to ensure rental properties are equipped with utility services prior to renting such properties

**Bill ID:** S1060
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Rachel May
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1060 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1060)

## Summary

Requires landlords to ensure rental properties are equipped with utility services prior to renting such properties; requires landlords to keep utility services connected in between tenants.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1060
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 9, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  MAY  --  read  twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the real property law, in relation  to  requiring  land-
  lords  to  ensure rental properties are equipped with utility services
  prior to renting such properties

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 235-b of the real property law is amended by adding
 a new subdivision 4 to read as follows:
  4.  THE  LANDLORD SHALL NOT RENT NOR LEASE ANY PROPERTY TO A TENANT OR
 TENANTS UNLESS SUCH PROPERTY IS IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE  NEW  YORK  STATE
 UNIFORM FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CODE ACT DESCRIBED IN ARTICLE EIGH-
 TEEN  OF  THE EXECUTIVE LAW, SPECIFICALLY THAT UTILITY SERVICES ARE MADE
 AVAILABLE TO SUCH DWELLING. A LANDLORD'S FAILURE  TO  BE  IN  COMPLIANCE
 WITH SUCH ACT PRIOR TO RENTAL OR LEASE OF SUCH PROPERTY, SHALL RESULT IN
 PENALTIES PURSUANT TO SECTIONS 145.15 AND 145.20 OF THE PENAL LAW.
  ยง 2. The real property law is amended by adding a new section 235-j to
 read as follows:
  ยง  235-J.  DUTY  OF  LANDLORD  TO  KEEP  UTILITY SERVICES CONNECTED IN
 BETWEEN TENANTS. 1.  A  LANDLORD  SHALL  PARTICIPATE  IN  ANY  VOLUNTARY
 PROGRAM  OFFERED  BY  THE  UTILITY COMPANY THAT SERVICES THEIR RENTED OR
 LEASED PROPERTY THAT WOULD REVERT ALL UTILITY ACCOUNTS TO THE LANDLORD'S
 NAME AND KEEP UTILITY SERVICES CONNECTED IN BETWEEN TENANTS.
  2. THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY IF THE UTILITY COMPANY IN  THE  RENTED
 OR LEASED PROPERTY'S AREA DOES NOT OFFER SUCH A PROGRAM.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00537-01-3