# Establishes Eid-al-Adha and Eid-al-Fitr as school holidays in public school districts

**Bill ID:** S1083
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Leroy Comrie
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1083 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1083)

## Summary

Establishes Eid-al-Adha and Eid-Al-Fitr as school holidays in certain school districts.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1083
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 10, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  COMRIE, BAILEY -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to  establishing  Eid-al-
  Adha and Eid-al-Fitr as school holidays
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 3204-a
 to read as follows:
  ยง 3204-A. EID-AL-ADHA AND EID-AL-FITR SCHOOL HOLIDAYS. 1. THE DAYS  OF
 THE  ISLAMIC  LUNAR CALENDAR DESIGNATED TO BEGIN ON THE TENTH DAY OF THE
 MONTH OF DHUL HIJJA AND COMMONLY KNOWN AS "EID-AL-ADHA", AND  THE  FIRST
 DAY  OF  SHAWWAI  KNOWN  AS EID-AL-FITR SHALL BE SCHOOL HOLIDAYS FOR ALL
 PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
  2. THE SCHOOL AUTHORITIES OF EVERY PUBLIC SCHOOL ARE HEREBY AUTHORIZED
 AND DIRECTED TO CAUSE ALL PUBLIC SCHOOLS WITHIN  SUCH  DISTRICTS  TO  BE
 CLOSED ON EID-AL-ADHA AND EID-AL-FITR.
  ยง  2.  Section  3604  of  the education law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 7-a to read as follows:
  7-A. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, FOR PURPOSES  OF  ANY
 CALCULATION  UNDER  SUBDIVISION  SEVEN  OR  EIGHT  OF  THIS SECTION, THE
 COMMISSIONER SHALL DISREGARD ANY REDUCTION RESULTING FROM OBSERVANCE  OF
 EID-AL-ADHA  AND  EID-AL-FITR  AND, IF NECESSARY, SUCH OBSERVED HOLIDAYS
 SHALL BE CALCULATED AS A SESSION DAY.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it shall have become a law. Effective immediately the  addition,  amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation  of  this act on its effective date are authorized to be made and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03406-01-3