# Directs the Queens county board of elections to provide language assistance in Bengali, Punjabi and Hindi

**Bill ID:** S1215
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Leroy Comrie
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1215 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1215)

## Summary

Directs the Queens county board of elections to provide language assistance in Bengali, Punjabi and Hindi.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1215
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 10, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  COMRIE, KRUEGER, SEPULVEDA, SERRANO -- read twice
  and ordered printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee
  on Elections
 
 AN ACT to amend the election law, in relation to  directing  the  Queens
  county  board  of elections to provide language assistance in Bengali,
  Punjabi and Hindi

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The election law is amended by adding a new section 3-507
 to read as follows:
  ยง 3-507. QUEENS COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS; VOTING MATERIALS IN  BENGA-
 LI,  PUNJABI  AND  HINDI.  THE  QUEENS  COUNTY  BOARD OF ELECTIONS SHALL
 PROVIDE WRITTEN LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE IN THE BENGALI,  PUNJABI  AND  HINDI
 LANGUAGES PURSUANT TO SECTION TWO HUNDRED THREE OF THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT
 OF  NINETEEN  HUNDRED  SIXTY-FIVE  (42  U.S.C. 1973AA-1A). SUCH LANGUAGE
 ASSISTANCE SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, BALLOTS,  SIGNS,  VOTER
 MAILINGS,  EMPLOYEE  AND VOLUNTEER TRAINING MATERIALS AND INFORMATION ON
 SUCH BOARD'S WEBSITE. IT SHALL ALSO PRODUCE AND DISSEMINATE COUNTYWIDE A
 BOOKLET THAT INCLUDES: (A) A VOTER REGISTRATION  FORM  IN  ENGLISH  WITH
 INSTRUCTIONS IN BENGALI, PUNJABI AND HINDI; (B) INSTRUCTIONS IN BENGALI,
 PUNJABI  AND  HINDI  REGARDING  THE CRITERIA AND APPLICATION PROCESS FOR
 OBTAINING AN ABSENTEE BALLOT; AND  (C)  A  SECTION  WITH  GENERAL  VOTER
 INFORMATION  IN  BENGALI,  PUNJABI  AND HINDI INCLUDING FREQUENTLY ASKED
 QUESTIONS. SUCH BOARD MAY INCLUDE OTHER LANGUAGES ON ITS WEBSITE AND  IN
 SUCH BOOKLET.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rules or regulations necessary for the  imple-
 mentation of this act on its effective date are authorized to be made on
 or before such date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01596-01-3