# Requires food service establishments to make deliveries of food in tamper evident packaging

**Bill ID:** S1217
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Leroy Comrie
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1217 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1217)

## Summary

Requires food service establishments to make deliveries of food in tamper evident packaging.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1217
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 10, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COMRIE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in  relation  to  requiring  food
  service  establishments  to  make deliveries of food in tamper evident
  packaging

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  Section 1352 of the public health law is amended by adding
 a new subdivision 5 to read as follows:
  5.  (A)  FOR  PURPOSES  OF  THIS SUBDIVISION, THE TERM "TAMPER EVIDENT
 PACKAGING" SHALL MEAN PACKAGING HAVING ONE OR MORE INDICATORS OR  BARRI-
 ERS  TO  ENTRY WHICH, IF BREACHED OR MISSING, CAN REASONABLY BE EXPECTED
 TO PROVIDE VISIBLE EVIDENCE TO CONSUMERS THAT TAMPERING HAS OCCURRED.
  (B) ANY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT DOING BUSINESS IN THIS STATE  WHICH
 OFFERS  FOOD  FOR DELIVERY SHALL PACKAGE AND DELIVER SUCH FOOD IN TAMPER
 EVIDENT PACKAGING. SUCH PACKAGING SHALL ALSO INCLUDE A  LABEL  WITH  THE
 WORDS "SEALED FOR YOUR PROTECTION. DO NOT CONSUME IF BROKEN OR MISSING".
 THE  PROVISIONS  OF THIS SECTION SHALL APPLY TO ALL FOOD DELIVERIES MADE
 BY A FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT, INCLUDING, BUT  NOT  LIMITED  TO,  FOOD
 DELIVERIES MADE BY A FOOD DELIVERY SERVICE.
  (C)  ANY  FOOD  SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT IN VIOLATION OF THIS SUBDIVISION
 SHALL BE SUBJECT TO A CIVIL FINE IN THE  AMOUNT  OF  TWO  HUNDRED  FIFTY
 DOLLARS FOR EACH VIOLATION.
  (D) THE COMMISSIONER IS AUTHORIZED TO PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS
 NECESSARY FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS SUBDIVISION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation of this act on its effective date are authorized to be  made  and
 completed on or before such date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03328-01-3