# Expands the offense of assault in the second degree to include the causing of injury to a frontline employee enforcing a rule or regulation related to controlling the spread of communicable diseases

**Bill ID:** S1247
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Liz Krueger
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1247 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1247)

## Summary

Expands the offense of assault in the second degree to include the causing of injury to a frontline employee enforcing a city or state rule or regulation related to controlling the spread of communicable diseases.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1247
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 11, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. KRUEGER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to expanding the  offense  of
  assault  in  the  second  degree to include the causing of injury to a
  frontline employee enforcing  a  city  or  state  rule  or  regulation
  related to controlling the spread of communicable diseases
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Legislative intent. The purpose of this act is  to  provide
 additional protection to the frontline employees who have been deputized
 by  the  state and by local governments to enforce the various rules and
 regulations surrounding controlling the spread of communicable diseases.
 State and local governments have instituted  various  policies  such  as
 requiring  the  wearing  of  personal protective equipment and requiring
 patrons to show proof of vaccination against COVID-19.  They  have  left
 enforcement  of  such policies up to local restaurants, venue employees,
 bus drivers, teachers and other frontline employees. Recent  attacks  on
 restaurant  employees  have  shown that due to the politicized nature of
 these public health policies, we must provide additional  protection  to
 frontline employees who are charged with enforcing the various rules and
 regulations put forth to reduce the spread of communicable diseases.
  ยง 2. Section 120.05 of the penal law is amended by adding a new subdi-
 vision 15 to read as follows:
  15.  WITH  INTENT  TO  PREVENT OR OBSTRUCT ANY FRONTLINE EMPLOYEE FROM
 ENFORCING ANY CITY OR STATE RULE OR REGULATION  RELATED  TO  CONTROLLING
 THE SPREAD OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASES, HE OR SHE CAUSES PHYSICAL INJURY TO
 SUCH FRONTLINE EMPLOYEE.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04827-01-3