# Relates to allowing a nursing home patient to install an electronic monitoring device or connected device in his or her room

**Bill ID:** S1440
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Joseph A. Griffo
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1440 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1440)

## Summary

Relates to allowing a nursing home patient to install, operate and maintain, at his or her own expense, an electronic monitoring device or connected device in his or her room.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1440
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 11, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. GRIFFO, MATTERA -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law,  in  relation  to  authorizing  a
  nursing  home  patient  to install, operate and maintain an electronic
  monitoring device or a connected device in his or her room

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 3 of section 2803-c of the public health law is
 amended by adding a new paragraph s to read as follows:
  S.  PURSUANT  TO  REGULATIONS  PROMULGATED  BY THE COMMISSIONER, EVERY
 PATIENT SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT, AT HIS OR HER  OWN  EXPENSE,  TO  INSTALL,
 OPERATE AND MAINTAIN AN ELECTRONIC MONITORING DEVICE OR CONNECTED DEVICE
 IN  HIS  OR  HER ROOM. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE TERM "ELEC-
 TRONIC MONITORING DEVICE" SHALL MEAN A SURVEILLANCE  INSTRUMENT  WITH  A
 FIXED  POSITION VIDEO CAMERA OR AN AUDIO RECORDING DEVICE, OR A COMBINA-
 TION THEREOF, WHICH IS INSTALLED IN A PATIENT'S ROOM AND  BROADCASTS  OR
 RECORDS  ACTIVITY OR SOUNDS OCCURRING IN SUCH ROOM.  FOR THE PURPOSES OF
 THIS SECTION, THE TERM "CONNECTED DEVICE" SHALL MEAN ANY DEVICE OR OTHER
 PHYSICAL OBJECT THAT IS CAPABLE OF DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY CONNECTING  TO
 THE  INTERNET AND THAT IS ASSIGNED AN INTERNET PROTOCOL ADDRESS OR BLUE-
 TOOTH ADDRESS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have  become  a  law.  Effective  immediately, the addition, amendment
 and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implementation
 of this act on  its  effective  date  are  authorized  to  be  made  and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03057-01-3