# Establishes the crime of disruption of an online public meeting

**Bill ID:** S1454
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** José M. Serrano
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1454 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1454)

## Summary

Establishes the crime of disruption of an online public meeting when a person with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, without lawful authority, and acting through a computer service, he or she disturbs any lawful assembly or meeting of persons open to the public conducted through a computer service; makes such crime a class B misdemeanor.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1454
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 12, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sens. SERRANO, JACKSON -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to establishing the crime  of
  disruption of an online public meeting
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The penal law is amended by adding a new  section  240.20-a
 to read as follows:
 § 240.20-A DISRUPTION OF AN ONLINE PUBLIC MEETING.
  1.  A PERSON IS GUILTY OF DISRUPTION OF AN ONLINE PUBLIC MEETING WHEN,
 WITH INTENT TO CAUSE PUBLIC INCONVENIENCE, ANNOYANCE OR  ALARM,  WITHOUT
 LAWFUL  AUTHORITY,  AND  ACTING  THROUGH  A  COMPUTER SERVICE, HE OR SHE
 DISTURBS ANY LAWFUL ASSEMBLY OR MEETING OF PERSONS OPEN  TO  THE  PUBLIC
 CONDUCTED THROUGH A COMPUTER SERVICE.
  2.  NOTHING  IN THIS SECTION SHALL PREVENT PROSECUTION OF A PERSON FOR
 DISORDERLY CONDUCT AS DEFINED IN SUBDIVISION FOUR OF SECTION  240.20  OF
 THIS ARTICLE OR ANY OTHER OFFENSE.
  DISRUPTION OF AN ONLINE PUBLIC MEETING IS A CLASS B MISDEMEANOR.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00413-01-3