# Creates a domestic abuse hotline for teens

**Bill ID:** S1506
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Jamaal Bailey
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1506 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1506)

## Summary

Creates a domestic abuse hotline for teens; requires all high schools within the state to conduct an assembly on domestic abuse.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1506
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 12, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  BAILEY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Children and Families
 
 AN ACT to amend the social services  law,  in  relation  to  creating  a
  domestic  abuse  hotline for teens; and to amend the education law, in
  relation to requiring a school assembly on domestic abuse

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  Section 459-h of the social services law, as renumbered by
 chapter  428  of the laws of 2009, is renumbered section 459-i and a new
 section 459-h is added to read as follows:
  ยง 459-H. DOMESTIC ABUSE HOTLINE FOR TEENS.  THE  COMMISSIONER  OF  THE
 OFFICE  OF  CHILDREN  AND  FAMILY SERVICES SHALL ESTABLISH A TWENTY-FOUR
 HOUR DOMESTIC ABUSE HOTLINE FOR TEENS. THE HOTLINE SHALL BE A  TOLL-FREE
 NUMBER. THE LOCAL SOCIAL SERVICES DISTRICT SHALL TAKE REASONABLE EFFORTS
 TO  INFORM  TEENS  LIVING  IN  THEIR DISTRICT OF THE AVAILABILITY OF THE
 HOTLINE.
  ยง 2.  Section 3234 of the education law, as renumbered by chapter  975
 of  the  laws of 1966, is renumbered section 3235 and a new section 3234
 is added to read as follows:
  ยง 3234. MANDATORY DOMESTIC ABUSE ASSEMBLY. EVERY  HIGH  SCHOOL  WITHIN
 THIS STATE SHALL ANNUALLY CONDUCT AN ASSEMBLY ON THE DANGERS OF DOMESTIC
 ABUSE.  THE  COMMISSIONER SHALL ESTABLISH THE GUIDELINES AND CONTENT FOR
 THE ASSEMBLY. THE ASSEMBLY SHALL ALSO SUPPLY THE STUDENTS WITH THE TOLL-
 FREE NUMBER FOR THE DOMESTIC ABUSE HOTLINE FOR TEENS.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately; provided,  however,  that
 section  two  of  this  act shall apply to any school year commencing at
 least 30 days after such effective date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04430-01-3