# Replaces all instances of the words or variations of the words feminine hygiene products and sanitary napkins with the words menstrual products or pads, respectively, or a variation thereof

**Bill ID:** S1522
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Roxanne J. Persaud
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S1522 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1522)

## Summary

Replaces all instances of the words or variations of the words feminine hygiene products and sanitary napkins with the words menstrual products and pads, respectively, or a variation thereof.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1522
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 12, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  PERSAUD,  ADDABBO,  COMRIE, HOYLMAN-SIGAL, MYRIE,
  SALAZAR -- read twice and ordered printed,  and  when  printed  to  be
  committed to the Committee on Women's Issues
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the correction law, the public health law and the tax
  law, in relation to replacing all instances of the words or variations
  of the words feminine hygiene products and sanitary napkins  with  the
  words menstrual products and pads, respectively, or a variation there-
  of
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 625 of the correction law, as  amended  by  chapter
 486 of the laws of 2022, is amended to read as follows:
  §  625.  [Feminine  hygiene]  MENSTRUAL  products.  [Feminine hygiene]
 MENSTRUAL products, including, but not limited  to,  [sanitary  napkins]
 PADS, tampons and panty liners, shall be provided at no cost to individ-
 uals  housed  in  state  and  local correctional facilities used for the
 general confinement of [female]  incarcerated  individuals  and  in  any
 other  state or local facility where [women] INDIVIDUALS are detained or
 confined by law enforcement agencies.
  § 2. Section 267 of the public health law, as added by  section  1  of
 part Q of chapter 56 of the laws of 2018, is amended to read as follows:
  § 267. [Feminine hygiene] MENSTRUAL products in schools. All elementa-
 ry  and  secondary  public  schools in the state serving students in any
 grade from grade  six  through  grade  twelve  shall  provide  [feminine
 hygiene]  MENSTRUAL products in the restrooms of such school building or
 buildings. Such products shall be provided at no charge to students.
  § 3. Paragraph 3-a of subdivision (a) of section 1115 of the tax  law,
 as  added  by  chapter  99  of  the  laws of 2016, is amended to read as
 follows:
  (3-a) [Feminine hygiene] MENSTRUAL products, including, but not limit-
 ed to, [sanitary napkins] PADS, tampons and panty liners.
  § 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02584-01-3