# Relates to the temporary appointment of heads of departments without the advice and consent of the senate

**Bill ID:** S1601
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Joseph A. Griffo
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1601 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1601)

## Summary

Relates to the temporary appointment of heads of departments without the advice and consent of the senate and sets time limits for serving in such capacity.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1601
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 12, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  GRIFFO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Investigations and Govern-
  ment Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the public officers law, in relation  to  the  temporary
  appointment  of heads of departments without the advice and consent of
  the senate

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The public officers law is amended by adding a new section
 33-b to read as follows:
  ยง 33-B. APPOINTMENT OF HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS  WITHOUT  THE  ADVICE  AND
 CONSENT OF THE SENATE. 1. NO PERSON SHALL SERVE AS THE HEAD OF A DEPART-
 MENT  FOR  MORE  THAN  NINETY DAYS WITHOUT THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE
 SENATE WHEN THE LEGISLATURE IS IN SESSION.
  2. WHEN A VACANCY OCCURS WHEN THE LEGISLATURE IS NOT  IN  SESSION,  NO
 PERSON  SHALL  SERVE  AS THE HEAD OF A DEPARTMENT WITHOUT THE ADVICE AND
 CONSENT OF THE SENATE FOR LONGER THAN THIRTY CALENDAR DAYS OF  THE  NEXT
 SUCCEEDING LEGISLATIVE SESSION.
  3.  A  PERSON  MAY  ONLY SERVE AS THE HEAD OF A DEPARTMENT WITHOUT THE
 ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE ONCE, REGARDLESS OF THE AMOUNT OF  TIME
 SUCH PERSON SERVED AS THE HEAD OF A DEPARTMENT.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02997-01-3