# Requires that the same educational requirements shall apply for students who require nursing services as for general education students

**Bill ID:** S1617
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Joseph P. Addabbo Jr.
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1617 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1617)

## Summary

Requires that the same educational requirements shall apply for students who require nursing services as for general education students; provides that nursing services may be delivered to students with disabilities through electronic communication or a virtual or online platform or in the home of the student.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1617
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ADDABBO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Education
 
 AN ACT in relation to virtual or  remote  instruction  days  for  public
  schools and private schools for students who require nursing services
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. A day of virtual or remote instruction, if instituted under
 a program approved by the commissioner, shall be considered  the  equiv-
 alent  of  a  full  day of school attendance for the purposes of meeting
 state and local graduation requirements, the awarding of course  credit,
 and such other matters as determined by the commissioner.
  If  a  program of virtual or remote instruction is implemented for the
 general education students, the same educational opportunities shall  be
 provided  to students who require nursing services. Nursing services may
 be delivered to students with disabilities through the use of electronic
 communication or a virtual or online platform or  in  the  home  of  the
 student  and  as  required  by  the  student's  individualized education
 program, to the greatest extent practicable.
  Nursing services shall be reimbursed for by the school district at the
 rate of a full instructional day of school  attendance  whether  on  the
 school campus or through the use of electronic communication or a virtu-
 al or online platform or in the home of the student.
  Guardians  of  students  who  require  nursing services may retain the
 provider of nursing services of their  choice  or  accept  the  provider
 offered by the school district.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04470-01-3