# Requires landlords to furnish each tenant either renewing or entering into a lease with a document describing the rights and duties of landlords and tenants

**Bill ID:** S1635
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Andrea Stewart-Cousins
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1635 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1635)

## Summary

Requires landlords to furnish each tenant either renewing or entering into a lease with a rider describing the rights and duties of landlords and tenants;  requires the rider to conform to the intent of section 5-702 of the general obligations law.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1635
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  STEWART-COUSINS -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the real property law, in relation to requiring a  land-
  lord  to furnish to each tenant signing a new or renewal lease a rider
  describing the rights and duties of landlords and tenants

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  real property law is amended by adding a new section
 223-c to read as follows:
  ยง 223-C. RENTERS' BILL OF RIGHTS. 1. EACH LANDLORD SUBJECT UNDER  THIS
 ARTICLE  SHALL FURNISH TO EACH TENANT EITHER RENEWING OR ENTERING INTO A
 LEASE, A RIDER DESCRIBING THE  RIGHTS  AND  DUTIES  OF  THE  CONTRACTING
 PARTIES.  THE LEASE SHALL HAVE IN BOLD PRINT APPEARING ON THE FIRST PAGE
 THE FOLLOWING: "ATTACHED TO THIS LEASE IS A 'RENTERS'  BILL  OF  RIGHTS'
 WITH THE PERTINENT RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES
 OF LANDLORDS AND TENANTS."  SUCH RIDER SHALL INCLUDE INFORMATION REGARD-
 ING  RELEVANT  RENT  CONTROL  OR  REGULATION, AS WELL AS THE APPROPRIATE
 ADMINISTRATIVE OR JUDICIAL BODY FOR HEARING  AND  DETERMINING  POTENTIAL
 DISPUTES BETWEEN LANDLORD AND TENANT.
  2. (A) THE RIDER SHALL BE IN A FORM PROMULGATED BY THE COMMISSIONER OF
 THE DIVISION OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY RENEWAL AND SHALL APPEAR IN LARGER
 TYPE THAN THE LEASE.
  (B)  THE  RIDER  SHALL  CONFORM  TO THE INTENT OF SECTION 5-702 OF THE
 GENERAL OBLIGATIONS LAW.
  (C) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL HAVE SIXTY DAYS FROM THE EFFECTIVE DATE  OF
 THIS SECTION TO PREPARE AND FINALIZE THE RIDER.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02277-02-3