# Relates to requiring elected officials for certain elected offices to post certain information regarding contributions on such candidate's campaign website

**Bill ID:** S1674
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Joseph P. Addabbo Jr.
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1674 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1674)

## Summary

Relates to requiring elected officials for certain elected offices to post certain information regarding contributions on such candidate's campaign website; requires the listing of donor names, and the amount of donor contributions of each donor for every contribution in excess of two hundred fifty dollars.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1674
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ADDABBO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Elections
 
 AN ACT to amend the election law, in relation  to  requiring  candidates
  for  certain  elected  offices  to  post certain information regarding
  contributions on such candidate's campaign website

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The election law is amended by adding a new section 14-121
 to read as follows:
  ยง 14-121. CONTRIBUTIONS TO BE POSTED ON CAMPAIGN  WEBSITES.  1.  ANY
 CANDIDATE  FOR  ELECTED OFFICE FOR THE OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR, THE COMP-
 TROLLER, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OR ANY LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT OF THE  SENATE
 OR ASSEMBLY SHALL:
  A.  POST ON THE HOMEPAGE OF HIS OR HER CAMPAIGN WEBSITE A DIRECT LINK
 TO THE BOARD OF ELECTIONS WEBSITE TO SUCH CANDIDATE'S  CAMPAIGN CONTRIB-
 UTIONS.
  B. POST ON THE HOMEPAGE OF HIS OR HER CAMPAIGN  WEBSITE  ALL  CONTRIB-
 UTIONS  OVER  TWO  HUNDRED  FIFTY DOLLARS WITHIN THIRTY DAYS OF RECEIPT;
 INCLUDING THE EXACT AMOUNT OF EACH CONTRIBUTION AND THE IDENTITY OF  THE
 DONOR.
  2.  SUCH CANDIDATE SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR ENSURING THAT THE INFORMA-
 TION AS REQUIRED IN PARAGRAPHS A  AND  B  OF  SUBDIVISION  ONE  OF  THIS
 SECTION IS POSTED.
  3.  ANY PERSON WHO SHALL KNOWINGLY AND WILLFULLY VIOLATE ANY PROVISION
 OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE GUILTY OF A CLASS A MISDEMEANOR.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04229-01-3