# Permits minors to be employed as a referee, umpire or official at a youth sporting event

**Bill ID:** S1747
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Jessica Ramos
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S1747 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1747)

## Summary

Permits certain minors to be employed as a referee, umpire or official at a youth sporting event; limits a minor 12 or 13 years of age to one youth sporting event per week.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1747
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  RAMOS,  BAILEY, MANNION -- read twice and ordered
  printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Labor
 
 AN ACT to amend the labor law, in relation to permitting the  employment
  of minors as referees, umpires or officials at youth sporting events

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 2 of the labor law  is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 subdivision 19 to read as follows:
  19.  "YOUTH SPORTING EVENT" MEANS ORGANIZED PARTICIPATION IN A COMPET-
 ITIVE PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AIMED AT USING, MAINTAINING OR  IMPROVING  PHYS-
 ICAL ABILITY AND SKILLS OF MINORS.
  ยง  2.  Subdivision  2  of  section  130 of the labor law is amended by
 adding a new paragraph i to read as follows:
  I. A MINOR TWELVE OR THIRTEEN YEARS OF AGE AS  A  REFEREE,  UMPIRE  OR
 OFFICIAL AT A YOUTH SPORTING EVENT FOR MINORS PREDOMINATELY TEN YEARS OF
 AGE  OR  LESS  WHEN  ATTENDANCE  UPON INSTRUCTION IS NOT REQUIRED BY THE
 EDUCATION LAW, PROVIDED THE EMPLOYING ORGANIZATION  RECEIVES  AND  MAIN-
 TAINS  BOTH  THE WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE MINOR'S PARENT OR GUARDIAN AND A
 CERTIFICATE WHICH SHALL BE PROVIDED TO THE EMPLOYING ORGANIZATION AT THE
 END OF EACH MARKING PERIOD BY THE MINOR'S SCHOOL WHICH SHALL ASSERT THAT
 SUCH MINOR IS IN SATISFACTORY ACADEMIC STANDING ACCORDING TO THE  STAND-
 ARDS  IN SUCH SCHOOL DISTRICT. A MINOR ELIGIBLE TO WORK PURSUANT TO THIS
 PARAGRAPH SHALL ONLY SERVE AS A REFEREE, UMPIRE OR OFFICIAL AT MOST  ONE
 YOUTH SPORTING EVENT PER WEEK.
  ยง  3.  Paragraph a of subdivision 3 of section 131 of the labor law is
 amended by adding a new subparagraph 7 to read as follows:
  (7) SERVICE AS A REFEREE, UMPIRE OR OFFICIAL AT A YOUTH SPORTING EVENT
 FOR MINORS PREDOMINATELY TWELVE YEARS OF AGE OR LESS.
  ยง 4. Paragraph a of subdivision 3 of section 132 of the labor  law  is
 amended by adding a new subparagraph 7 to read as follows:
  (7) SERVICE AS A REFEREE, UMPIRE OR OFFICIAL AT A YOUTH SPORTING EVENT
 FOR MINORS PREDOMINATELY FIFTEEN YEARS OF AGE OR LESS.
  ยง 5. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04649-01-3