# Requires wardens or superintendents of correctional facilities to accept assistance from state and federal agencies and municipalities

**Bill ID:** S1741
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Jessica Ramos
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1741 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1741)

## Summary

Requires wardens or superintendents of correctional facilities to accept assistance from state and federal agencies and municipalities in the event of an emergency, including loss of power, heat, or water or a medical state of emergency.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1741
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  RAMOS,  BAILEY,  MYRIE  -- read twice and ordered
  printed, and when printed to be committed to the  Committee  on  Crime
  Victims, Crime and Correction
 
 AN  ACT to amend the correction law, in relation to requiring wardens or
  superintendents of correctional facilities to accept  assistance  from
  state and federal agencies and municipalities
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The correction law is amended by adding a new section 27 to
 read as follows:
  ยง 27. ASSISTANCE BY STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES AND MUNICIPALITIES. THE
 WARDEN OR SUPERINTENDENT OF ANY STATE  INSTITUTION  IN  THE  DEPARTMENT,
 HAVING  DUE  REGARD  TO  THE  SAFETY OF THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS AND
 PROPERTY OF THE INSTITUTION, SHALL ACCEPT HUMANITARIAN AID FROM STATE OR
 FEDERAL AGENCIES OR FROM MUNICIPALITIES IN THE EVENT  OF  AN  EMERGENCY.
 FOR  THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, AN "EMERGENCY" SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT
 BE LIMITED TO, LOSS OF POWER, HEAT OR WATER OR A MEDICAL STATE OF  EMER-
 GENCY AND "HUMANITARIAN AID" SHALL MEAN MATERIAL ASSISTANCE ACTUALLY AND
 REASONABLY  NECESSARY,  INCLUDING  BUT  NOT  LIMITED  TO  BOTTLED WATER,
 MEDICAL SUPPLIES AND SUPPLY KITS, BATTERY OR SOLAR POWERED  FLASHLIGHTS,
 BLANKETS,  MONETARY  DONATIONS,  MEDICAL PREVENTION SUPPLIES MANDATED BY
 THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION  AND  MANDATORY  OUTBREAK
 PLANS  WHICH  ARE COMPARABLE IN STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR HEALTHCARE
 CENTERS, TO ALLEVIATE SUFFERING AND PROVIDE SUPPORT TO STAFF,  INCARCER-
 ATED  INDIVIDUALS AND OTHER INDIVIDUALS ON SITE AT ANY STATE INSTITUTION
 DURING AN EMERGENCY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04662-01-3