# Prohibits the denial of a building permit on the basis that such building will be a mixed-fuel building

**Bill ID:** S1825
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Mario Mattera
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1825 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1825)

## Summary

Prohibits a municipal corporation from prohibiting the issuing of a permit for the construction of any new commercial, residential, or mixed-use building on the basis that such building will be a mixed-fuel building.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1825
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. MATTERA -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Local Government
 
 AN ACT to amend the general municipal law, in  relation  to  prohibiting
  the  denial  of a building permit on the basis that such building will
  be a mixed-fuel building

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  general  municipal  law  is  amended by adding a new
 section 99-z to read as follows:
  ยง 99-Z. PROHIBITION ON MIXED-FUEL BUILDINGS. 1.  NO  MUNICIPAL  CORPO-
 RATION  SHALL  PROHIBIT  THE ISSUING OF A PERMIT FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF
 ANY NEW COMMERCIAL, RESIDENTIAL, OR MIXED-USE BUILDING ON THE BASIS THAT
 SUCH BUILDING WILL BE A MIXED-FUEL BUILDING.
  2. AS USED IN THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOW-
 ING MEANINGS:
  A. "MIXED-USE BUILDING" SHALL MEAN A BUILDING USED FOR  BOTH  RESIDEN-
 TIAL AND COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
  B. "MIXED-FUEL BUILDING" SHALL MEAN A BUILDING THAT USES A COMBINATION
 OF  ELECTRICITY AND NATURAL GAS, PROPANE, OR OIL TO MEET BUILDING ENERGY
 NEEDS.
  C. "BUILDING ENERGY NEEDS" SHALL MEAN ALL SPACE CONDITIONING INCLUDING
 HEATING AND COOLING, WATER HEATING INCLUDING  POOLS  AND  SPAS,  COOKING
 APPLIANCES AND CLOTHES DRYING APPLIANCES.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06067-01-3