# Requires the commissioner of the department of housing preservation and development to issue an annual report on the tenant interim lease program

**Bill ID:** S1869
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1869 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1869)

## Summary

Requires the commissioner of the department of housing preservation and development to issue an annual report on the tenant interim lease program.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1869
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Cities 1
 
 AN ACT to amend the New York city charter, in relation to requiring  the
  commissioner of the department of housing preservation and development
  to issue an annual report on the tenant interim lease program

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The New York city  charter  is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 1807 to read as follows:
  ยง  1807.  TENANT  INTERIM LEASE PROGRAM REPORTING. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY
 PROVISION OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY  AND  IN  ADDITION  TO  THE  FUNCTIONS,
 POWERS  AND DUTIES THAT THE COMMISSIONER MAY EXERCISE OR DELEGATE PURSU-
 ANT TO SECTION EIGHTEEN HUNDRED TWO OF THIS CHAPTER, ON  OR  BEFORE  THE
 FIRST OF FEBRUARY NEXT SUCCEEDING THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION AND
 ANNUALLY  THEREAFTER, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL MAKE A REPORT TO THE GOVER-
 NOR, THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT OF THE STATE SENATE,  THE  SPEAKER  OF  THE
 STATE  ASSEMBLY,  THE  MAYOR AND THE COUNCIL ON THE TENANT INTERIM LEASE
 PROGRAM.  SUCH REPORT SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO,  THE  AMOUNT
 OF  FUNDING  MADE  AVAILABLE  TO  SUCH  PROGRAM AND HOW SUCH FUNDING WAS
 UTILIZED, THE CURRENT BUILDINGS AND PARTICIPANTS IN  SUCH  PROGRAM,  AND
 SUGGESTED  ACTIONS  TO  IMPROVE THE ABILITY OF THE PROGRAMS TO CARRY OUT
 ITS GOALS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06094-01-3