# Relates to the tax deduction for costs associated with organ donation

**Bill ID:** S1864
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Samra Brouk
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1864 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1864)

## Summary

Allows a taxpayer or the spouse of a taxpayer to deduct costs related to the taxpayer's organ donation; includes child care costs within such allowable costs.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1864
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  BROUK  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Investigations and Govern-
  ment Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the tax law, in relation to  the  donation  of  a  human
  organ
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Paragraph 38 of subsection (c) of section 612  of  the  tax
 law,  as added by chapter 565 of the laws of 2006, the opening paragraph
 as amended by chapter 814 of the laws of 2022, is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  (38)  An  amount  of  up  to ten thousand dollars if a taxpayer, while
 living, donates one or more of his or her human organs to another  human
 being  for  human organ transplantation. For purposes of this paragraph,
 "human organ" means all or part of a liver, pancreas, kidney, intestine,
 lung, or bone marrow. A subtract modification allowed under  this  para-
 graph  shall  be  claimed  in  the taxable year in which the human organ
 transplantation occurs. Provided, however, that this deduction shall not
 apply to any donation for which the taxpayer has received benefits under
 section forty-three hundred seventy-one of the public health law.
  (A) A taxpayer shall claim the  subtract  modification  allowed  under
 this paragraph only once and such subtract modification shall be claimed
 for  only  the following unreimbursed expenses which are incurred by the
 taxpayer OR SPOUSE OF THE TAXPAYER, and related to the taxpayer's  organ
 donation:
  (i) travel expenses;
  (ii) lodging expenses; [and]
  (iii) lost wages[.]; AND
  (IV) CHILD CARE COSTS;
  (B)  The  subtract modification allowed under this paragraph shall not
 be claimed by a part-year resident or a non-resident of this state.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the  same  date  and  in  the  same
 manner as chapter 814 of the laws of 2022, takes effect.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05617-01-3