# Provides for victim statements at the sentencing of a defendant for a misdemeanor

**Bill ID:** S1901AA
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Toby Ann Stavisky
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S1901A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1901A)

## Summary

Enacts Emma's Law, providing for victim statements at the sentencing of a defendant for a misdemeanor.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1901--A
  Cal. No. 465
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sens. STAVISKY, ROLISON -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes -- reported
  favorably  from  said  committee,  ordered to first and second report,
  ordered to a third reading, passed by  Senate  and  delivered  to  the
  Assembly,  recalled,  vote  reconsidered,  restored  to third reading,
  amended and ordered reprinted, retaining its place  in  the  order  of
  third reading
 
 AN ACT to amend the criminal procedure law, in relation to victim state-
  ments at the sentencing of a defendant for a misdemeanor
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Short title. This act shall be known and may  be  cited  as
 "Emma's Law".
  ยง  2. Paragraph (b) of subdivision 2 of section 380.50 of the criminal
 procedure law, as added by chapter 307 of the laws of 1992,  is  amended
 to read as follows:
  (b)  If  the  defendant  is being sentenced for (1) a felony, OR (2) A
 MISDEMEANOR TO  WHICH  THE  DEFENDANT PLED  GUILTY  AFTER  BEING
 CHARGED WITH A FELONY OFFENSE IN AN INDICTMENT OR INFORMATION IN SUPERI-
 OR  COURT  WHERE SUCH FELONY OFFENSE RESULTED IN SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY
 TO THE VICTIM, THEN the court, if requested at least ten days  prior  to
 the  sentencing date, shall accord the victim the right to make a state-
 ment with regard to any matter relevant to the question of sentence. The
 court shall notify the defendant  no  less  than  seven  days  prior  to
 sentencing  of the victim's intent to make a statement at sentencing. If
 the defendant does not receive timely notice pursuant to  this  subdivi-
 sion, the defendant may request a reasonable adjournment.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05831-03-3