# Directs the commissioner of agriculture and markets to establish a program to provide funding to emergency food providers to purchase prepared meals from New York restaurants and deliver them to families in need

**Bill ID:** S1906
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1906 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1906)

## Summary

Directs the commissioner of agriculture and markets, in consultation with the commissioner of the office of temporary and disability assistance, to establish a grant program to provide funding to emergency food providers to purchase prepared meals from New York restaurants and deliver them to families in need.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1906
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Agriculture
 
 AN ACT to amend the agriculture and markets law, in relation to  direct-
  ing the commissioner of agriculture and markets to establish a program
  to  provide  funding  to emergency food providers to purchase prepared
  meals from New York restaurants and deliver them to families in need
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 16 of the agriculture and markets law is amended by
 adding a new subdivision 53 to read as follows:
  53.  DEVELOP,  IN  CONSULTATION WITH THE COMMISSIONER OF THE OFFICE OF
 TEMPORARY AND DISABILITY ASSISTANCE, A  GRANT  PROGRAM,  WITHIN  FUNDING
 MADE  AVAILABLE  FOR  SUCH  PROGRAM, TO PROVIDE AWARDS TO EMERGENCY FOOD
 PROVIDERS TO PURCHASE PREPARED MEALS FROM ELIGIBLE NEW YORK  RESTAURANTS
 AND  DELIVER THEM TO FAMILIES IN NEED. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL PROMULGATE
 CRITERIA FOR A RESTAURANT TO PARTICIPATE IN SUCH  PROGRAM,  WHICH  SHALL
 INCLUDE  BUT  NOT BE LIMITED TO, PASSING ALL HEALTH INSPECTIONS, COMPLI-
 ANCE WITH ALL LICENSING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO SUCH RESTAURANT,  AND
 CREATION  OF MEALS ALIGNING WITH CURRENT MYPLATE STANDARDS ISSUED BY THE
 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. SUCH PROGRAM SHALL ALSO ENCOUR-
 AGE PARTICIPATING RESTAURANTS TO  UTILIZE  NEW  YORK  INGREDIENTS  WHERE
 POSSIBLE.  THE COMMISSIONER SHALL PROMULGATE ANY RULES AND REGULATIONS
 NECESSARY FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS SUBDIVISION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06111-01-3