# Prohibits the use of performance-enhancing drugs in horseracing

**Bill ID:** S1960
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Joseph P. Addabbo Jr.
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S1960 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S1960)

## Summary

Prohibits the use of performance-enhancing drugs in horseracing.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  1960
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ADDABBO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Racing, Gaming and  Wager-
  ing
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the racing, pari-mutuel wagering and breeding law, in
  relation to prohibiting the  use  of  performance-enhancing  drugs  in
  horseracing

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Legislative intent. The use of performance-enhancing  drugs
 in  horseracing  threatens the safety and welfare of horses and jockeys,
 creates unfair competition,  deceives  horse  buyers  and  the  wagering
 public.  The  use  of  performance-enhancing drugs in horseracing is not
 permitted in most jurisdictions outside the United  States.  The  United
 States stands alone in its permissive use of performance-enhancing drugs
 and  New York is no exception. In New York State the use of performance-
 enhancing drugs is illegal in every sport other  than  horseracing.  The
 purpose of this legislation is to insure that the use of performance-en-
 hancing drugs in horseraces is prohibited in the State of New York.
  ยง  2.  The racing, pari-mutuel wagering and breeding law is amended by
 adding a new section 902-a to read as follows:
  ยง 902-A. PROHIBITIONS ON USE OF PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING DRUGS. 1.  DEFI-
 NITIONS. AS USED IN THIS SECTION:
  (A)  "ACCREDITED THIRD PARTY CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT BODY" MEANS A TEST-
 ING LABORATORY THAT HAS AN ACCREDITATION:
  (1)  MEETING  INTERNATIONAL  ORGANIZATION  FOR  STANDARDIZATION/
 INTERNATIONAL  ELECTROTECHNICAL  COMMISSION STANDARD 17025:2005 ENTITLED
 'GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE  COMPETENCE  OF  TESTING  AND  CALIBRATION
 LABORATORIES' (OR ANY SUCCESSOR STANDARD);
  (2)  FROM  AN  ACCREDITATION  BODY  THAT  IS  A  SIGNATORY  TO  THE
 INTERNATIONAL LABORATORY ACCREDITATION  COOPERATION  MUTUAL  RECOGNITION
 ARRANGEMENT; AND
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01388-01-3
 S. 1960  2
 
  (3)  THAT  INCLUDES TESTING FOR PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING DRUGS WITHIN THE
 SCOPE OF THE ACCREDITATION.
  (B)  "PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING  DRUG"  MEANS  ANY  SUBSTANCE  CAPABLE  OF
 AFFECTING THE PERFORMANCE OF A HORSE AT ANY TIME BY ACTING ON THE  NERV-
 OUS SYSTEM, CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM, RESPIRATORY SYSTEM, DIGESTIVE SYSTEM,
 URINARY  SYSTEM,  REPRODUCTIVE  SYSTEM,  MUSCULOSKELETAL  SYSTEM,  BLOOD
 SYSTEM, IMMUNE SYSTEM (OTHER THAN LICENSED VACCINES  AGAINST  INFECTIOUS
 AGENTS),  OR  ENDOCRINE  SYSTEM  OF  THE HORSE, INCLUDING THE SUBSTANCES
 LISTED IN THE ALPHABETIZED LISTING OF DRUGS IN THE JANUARY 2010 REVISION
 OF THE ASSOCIATION OF RACING COMMISSIONERS INTERNATIONAL, INC., PUBLICA-
 TION  ENTITLED  "UNIFORM  CLASSIFICATION  GUIDELINES  FOR  FOREIGN
 SUBSTANCES".
  2.  PROHIBITION ON ENTERING HORSES UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF PERFORMANCE-
 ENHANCING DRUGS IN NEW YORK STATE RACES. A PERSON SHALL NOT:
  (A) ENTER A HORSE IN A RACE IN THE STATE OF NEW  YORK  IF  THE  PERSON
 KNOWS  THE HORSE IS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF A PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING DRUG;
 OR
  (B) KNOWINGLY PROVIDE A HORSE WITH A PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING DRUG IF THE
 HORSE, WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF THE DRUG, WILL PARTICIPATE IN A RACE
 IN THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
  3. REGULATIONS OF THE HOST RACING ASSOCIATION BANNING  PERFORMANCE-EN-
 HANCING  DRUGS. A HOST RACING ASSOCIATION MAY NOT CONDUCT A HORSERACE IN
 THE STATE OF NEW YORK UNLESS THE HOST RACING ASSOCIATION HAS A POLICY IN
 PLACE THAT:
  (A) BANS ANY PERSON FROM PROVIDING A HORSE WITH A  PERFORMANCE-ENHANC-
 ING  DRUG IF THE HORSE WILL PARTICIPATE IN SUCH A HORSERACE IN THE STATE
 OF NEW YORK WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF THE DRUG;
  (B) BANS THE RACING OF A HORSE IN THE STATE OF NEW YORK THAT IS  UNDER
 THE INFLUENCE OF A PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING DRUG;
  (C)  REQUIRES,  FOR  EACH  HORSERACE IN THE STATE OF NEW YORK, THAT AN
 ACCREDITED THIRD PARTY CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT BODY TEST FOR  ANY  PERFOR-
 MANCE-ENHANCING  DRUG  THE  FIRST-PLACE  HORSE IN THE RACE AND ONE ADDI-
 TIONAL HORSE, TO BE RANDOMLY SELECTED FROM THE OTHER HORSES  PARTICIPAT-
 ING IN THE RACE;
  (D)  REQUIRES  THE  ACCREDITED  THIRD PARTY CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT BODY
 PERFORMING TESTS DESCRIBED IN  PARAGRAPH  (C)  OF  THIS  SUBDIVISION  TO
 REPORT  ANY  TEST RESULTS DEMONSTRATING THAT A HORSE MAY PARTICIPATE, OR
 MAY HAVE PARTICIPATED, IN A HORSERACE IN THE STATE  OF  NEW  YORK  WHILE
 UNDER  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  A  PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING  DRUG  TO THE GAMING
 COMMISSION.
  4. CIVIL PENALTIES. A PERSON THAT PROVIDES  A  HORSE  WITH  A  PERFOR-
 MANCE-ENHANCING  DRUG  OR  RACES  A  HORSE  IN  THE STATE OF NEW YORK IN
 VIOLATION SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE FOLLOWING CIVIL PENALTIES:
  (A) FOR THE FIRST SUCH VIOLATION: A CIVIL PENALTY  OF  NOT  LESS  THAN
 FIVE  THOUSAND  DOLLARS AND SUSPENSION FOR A PERIOD OF NOT LESS THAN ONE
 HUNDRED EIGHTY DAYS FROM ALL ACTIVITIES RELATING TO ANY HORSERACE IN THE
 STATE OF NEW YORK;
  (B) FOR THE SECOND SUCH VIOLATION: A CIVIL PENALTY OF  NOT  LESS  THAN
 TWENTY THOUSAND DOLLARS AND SUSPENSION FOR A PERIOD OF NOT LESS THAN ONE
 YEAR  FROM  ALL ACTIVITIES RELATING TO ANY HORSERACE IN THE STATE OF NEW
 YORK; AND
  (C) FOR THE THIRD OR SUBSEQUENT SUCH VIOLATION: A CIVIL PENALTY OF NOT
 LESS THAN FIFTY THOUSAND  DOLLARS  AND  PERMANENT  BANISHMENT  FROM  ALL
 ACTIVITIES RELATING TO ANY HORSERACE IN THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
  5.  PAYMENT  OF  CIVIL  PENALTIES.  A  CIVIL PENALTY IMPOSED UNDER THE
 PROVISIONS OF SUBDIVISION FOUR OF THIS SECTION  SHALL  BE  PAID  TO  THE
 S. 1960  3
 
 STATE OF NEW YORK WITHOUT REGARD TO WHETHER THE IMPOSITION OF THE PENAL-
 TY  RESULTS  FROM  THE  INITIATION  OF  A  CIVIL  ACTION PURSUANT TO THE
 PROVISIONS OF SUBDIVISION NINE OF THIS SECTION.
  6.  SUSPENSION OF HORSES. A HORSE THAT IS PROVIDED WITH A PERFORMANCE-
 ENHANCING DRUG OR IS RACED IN VIOLATION SHALL:
  (A) FOR THE FIRST SUCH VIOLATION, BE SUSPENDED FOR  A  PERIOD  OF  NOT
 LESS  THAN  ONE  HUNDRED EIGHTY DAYS FROM RACING IN ANY HORSERACE IN THE
 STATE OF NEW YORK;
  (B) FOR THE SECOND SUCH VIOLATION, BE SUSPENDED FOR A  PERIOD  OF  NOT
 LESS  THAN  ONE  YEAR  FROM  RACING IN ANY HORSERACE IN THE STATE OF NEW
 YORK; AND
  (C) FOR THE THIRD OR SUBSEQUENT SUCH VIOLATION,  BE  SUSPENDED  FOR  A
 PERIOD  OF  NOT  LESS THAN TWO YEARS FROM RACING IN ANY HORSERACE IN THE
 STATE OF NEW YORK.
  7. ENFORCEMENT. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, THE GAMING
 COMMISSION SHALL HAVE THE AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE THE  PROVISIONS  OF  THIS
 SECTION.
  8. RULEMAKING. THE GAMING COMMISSION SHALL PRESCRIBE SUCH RULES AS MAY
 BE NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.
  9. PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION FOR CERTAIN VIOLATIONS. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY
 OTHER  SECTION, IN ANY CASE IN WHICH A PERSON HAS REASON TO BELIEVE THAT
 AN INTEREST OF THAT PERSON IS THREATENED OR ADVERSELY  AFFECTED  BY  THE
 ENGAGEMENT  OF ANOTHER PERSON IN A PRACTICE THAT VIOLATES A PROVISION OF
 THIS SECTION OR A RULE PRESCRIBED UNDER  THIS  SECTION  THE  PERSON  MAY
 BRING A CIVIL ACTION IN AN APPROPRIATE COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION:
  (A) TO ENJOIN THE PRACTICE;
  (B) TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROVISION OR RULE;
  (C) TO ENFORCE THE PENALTIES PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SUBDIVISION;
  (D)  TO  OBTAIN  DAMAGES  OR  RESTITUTION,  INCLUDING  COURT COSTS AND
 REASONABLE ATTORNEY AND EXPERT WITNESS FEES; AND
  (E) TO OBTAIN SUCH OTHER RELIEF AS THE COURT CONSIDERS APPROPRIATE.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately and  shall  apply  to  all
 horseraces occurring on or after such effective date.