# Includes bonus in the definition of wages for purposes of the labor law

**Bill ID:** S2051
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Robert Jackson
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S2051 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S2051)

## Summary

Includes bonus in the definition of wages for purposes of the labor law when the formula under which a bonus is determined is available to the employer or when the amount of a bonus has been declared; relates to the forfeit of wages.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  2051
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 18, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. JACKSON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Labor
 
 AN ACT to amend the labor law, in relation to  including  bonus  compen-
  sation in the definition of wages and forfeit of wages
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 1 of section 190 of the labor law,  as  amended
 by  chapter 328 of the laws of 1972, is amended and a new subdivision 10
 is added to read as follows:
  1. "Wages" means the earnings of an employee  for  labor  or  services
 rendered,  regardless of whether the amount of earnings is determined on
 a time, piece, commission, BONUS, or other basis. The term "wages"  also
 includes  benefits or wage supplements as defined in section one hundred
 ninety-eight-c of this article, except for the purposes of sections  one
 hundred ninety-one and one hundred ninety-two of this article.
  10.  "BONUS" CONSTITUTES WAGES AS DEFINED IN SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS
 SECTION, REGARDLESS OF THE SOURCE OF REVENUE, WHEN (A) THE FORMULA UNDER
 WHICH A BONUS IS DETERMINED IS CERTAIN AND  ALL  THE  DATA  UTILIZED  IN
 CALCULATING  THE AMOUNT OF A BONUS UNDER THE FORMULA IS AVAILABLE TO THE
 EMPLOYER OR (B) WHEN THE AMOUNT OF A BONUS  HAS  BEEN  DECLARED  BY  THE
 EMPLOYER.
  ยง 2. The labor law is amended by adding a new section 193-a to read as
 follows:
  ยง  193-A.  WAGES NON-FORFEITABLE. ALL WAGES COVERED UNDER THIS ARTICLE
 SHALL BE NON-FORFEITABLE ONCE THE AMOUNT OF THE WAGE  IS  KNOWN  OR  CAN
 WITH REASONABLE CERTAINTY BE KNOWN.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05472-01-3