# Increases the length of the term of office to four years for members of the legislature

**Bill ID:** S2058
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Robert Jackson
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S2058 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S2058)

## Summary

Increases the length of the term of office to four years for members of the legislature.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  2058
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 18, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sens. JACKSON, BRISPORT, MANNION -- read twice and ordered
  printed,  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Judici-
  ary
 
  CONCURRENT RESOLUTION OF THE SENATE AND ASSEMBLY
 
 proposing an amendment to section 2 of article 3 of the constitution, in
  relation to increasing the length of the term of office for members of
  the legislature
 
  Section 1. Resolved (if the Assembly concur), That section 2 of  arti-
 cle 3 of the constitution be amended to read as follows:
  ยง  2. The senate shall consist of fifty members, except as hereinafter
 provided. The senators [elected in the year one thousand  eight  hundred
 and  ninety-five  shall  hold  their  offices for three years, and their
 successors] shall be [chosen] ELECTED for TERMS OF two years;  PROVIDED,
 THAT SENATORS ELECTED IN THE YEAR TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR AND IN SUBSE-
 QUENT  YEARS SHALL HOLD THEIR OFFICES FOR FOUR YEARS. The assembly shall
 consist of one hundred and fifty members. The assembly members  [elected
 in  the  year  one  thousand  nine  hundred  and thirty-eight, and their
 successors,] shall be [chosen] ELECTED for TERMS OF two years; PROVIDED,
 THAT ASSEMBLY MEMBERS ELECTED IN THE YEAR TWO THOUSAND  TWENTY-FOUR  AND
 IN SUBSEQUENT YEARS SHALL HOLD THEIR OFFICES FOR FOUR YEARS.
  ยง  2. Resolved (if the Assembly concur), That the foregoing amendments
 be referred to the first regular legislative session convening after the
 next succeeding general election of members of  the  assembly,  and,  in
 conformity  with  section  1  of  article  19  of  the  constitution, be
 published three months previous to the time of such election.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD89056-01-3