# Requires the use of gender-neutral terminology on state websites

**Bill ID:** S208AA
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S208A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S208A)

## Summary

Establishes that state agencies or authorities shall implement gender-neutral terminology on state websites.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  208--A
  Cal. No. 430
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Internet and Technology --
  reported favorably from said committee, ordered to  first  and  second
  report,  ordered to a third reading, passed by Senate and delivered to
  the Assembly, recalled, vote reconsidered, restored to third  reading,
  amended  and  ordered  reprinted,  retaining its place in the order of
  third reading
 
 AN ACT to amend the state technology law, in relation to requiring state
  websites to use gender-neutral terminology
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The state technology law is amended by adding a new section
 103-b to read as follows:
  ยง 103-B. GENDER-NEUTRAL TERMINOLOGY; STATE AGENCIES. EACH STATE AGENCY
 SHALL USE GENDER-NEUTRAL TERMINOLOGY ON THEIR WEBSITES; PROVIDED, HOWEV-
 ER, IF SUCH LANGUAGE IS IN REFERENCE TO A SPECIFIC PERSON, OR A SPECIFIC
 GROUP  OF  PEOPLE, THE LANGUAGE REFERRING TO SUCH PERSON OR GROUP MAY BE
 GENDERED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE GENDER IDENTITY OF SUCH PERSON OR  GROUP
 OF PEOPLE.
  ยง  2.  Section  103 of the state technology law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 23 to read as follows:
  23. TO ISSUE GUIDANCE FOR STATE AGENCIES IN THEIR COMPLIANCE WITH  THE
 GENDER-NEUTRAL TERMINOLOGY REQUIREMENTS SET FORTH IN SECTION ONE HUNDRED
 THREE-B OF THIS CHAPTER.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00976-03-3