# Relates to the use of fluoroscopy by physician assistants

**Bill ID:** S2126
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Gustavo Rivera
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S2126 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S2126)

## Summary

Relates to the use of fluoroscopy by physician assistants.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  2126
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 18, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sens. RIVERA, GALLIVAN -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to the use  of  fluo-
  roscopy by physician assistants
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 3501 of the public health law is amended by  adding
 a new subdivision 20 to read as follows:
  20.  "FLUOROSCOPY"  MEANS AN X-RAY BASED TECHNIQUE THAT ALLOWS CONTIN-
 UOUS REAL-TIME IMAGING OF AN INSTRUMENT, DYE,  OR  BODY  PART  DURING  A
 DIAGNOSTIC  OR TREATMENT PROCEDURE SO THAT LOCATION AND MOVEMENT OF SUCH
 INSTRUMENT, DYE, OR BODY PART CAN BE DETECTED AND EVALUATED.
  ยง 2. Paragraphs (c) and (d) of subdivision 2 of section  3502  of  the
 public  health  law,  as  added  by chapter 175 of the laws of 2006, are
 amended, and a new paragraph (e) is added to read as follows:
  (c) only persons licensed under this article shall practice  radiogra-
 phy,  radiation  therapy or nuclear medicine technology or use the title
 "radiographer,"  "radiologic  technologist,"  "radiation  therapist"  or
 "nuclear medicine technologist" or use the abbreviations LRT, RTT, LRTT,
 NMT, or LNMT with his or her name; [and]
  (d) notwithstanding paragraph (c) of this subdivision, quality control
 tests  and radiation therapy treatment planning may also be performed by
 individuals not licensed by this article[.]; AND
  (E) A LICENSED PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY ENGAGE IN THE USE OF FLUOROSCO-
 PY FOR GUIDANCE OF DIAGNOSTIC AND THERAPEUTIC PROCEDURES; PROVIDED  THAT
 THE  PHYSICIAN  ASSISTANT  HAS  SUCCESSFULLY  COMPLETED  AN  EDUCATIONAL
 PROGRAM CONSISTING OF AT LEAST FORTY HOURS OF DIDACTIC AND  FORTY  HOURS
 OF CLINICAL TRAINING WITH SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF A COMPETENCY EXAM, AS
 APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation of this act on its effective date are authorized to be  made  and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01804-01-3