# Relates to the number of signatures needed for designating petitions in counties with a population of two hundred fifty thousand or fewer

**Bill ID:** S304AA
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Rachel May
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S304A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S304A)

## Summary

Relates to the number of signatures needed for designating petitions in counties with a population of two hundred fifty thousand or fewer.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  304--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  MAY  --  read  twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Elections  --  recommitted
  to the Committee on Elections in accordance with Senate Rule 6, sec. 8
  --  committee  discharged,  bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended
  and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the election law, in relation to the  number  of  signa-
  tures  needed  for designating petitions in counties with a population
  of two hundred fifty thousand or fewer
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Section 6-136 of the election law is amended by adding two
 new subdivisions 4 and 5 to read as follows:
  4. IN COUNTIES WITH A POPULATION OF  TWO  HUNDRED  FIFTY  THOUSAND  OR
 FEWER  AND  NOTWITHSTANDING  SUBDIVISION TWO OF THIS SECTION, FOR DESIG-
 NATIONS MADE BY PETITION, THE SIGNATURE REQUIREMENT  NUMBERS  STATED  IN
 PARAGRAPHS  (A)  THROUGH (L) OF SUBDIVISION TWO OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE
 REDUCED BY ONE-QUARTER,  ROUNDED  DOWN  TO  THE  NEAREST  WHOLE  NUMBER.
 PROVIDED,  HOWEVER, THAT THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL NOT APPLY TO DESIGNATING
 PETITIONS FOR CONGRESSIONAL OR STATEWIDE OFFICES.
  5. NOTWITHSTANDING SUBDIVISION TWO OF THIS  SECTION,  FOR  DESIGNATING
 PETITIONS  FOR  POLITICAL  SUBDIVISIONS IN COUNTIES WITH A POPULATION OF
 TWO HUNDRED FIFTY THOUSAND OR FEWER, EXCEPT FOR THE POSITION  OF  MEMBER
 OF  THE  WARD,  TOWN,  CITY OR COUNTY COMMITTEE, SUCH PETITIONS SHALL BE
 SIGNED BY NOT LESS THAN THREE AND THREE-QUARTERS PER CENTUM,  AS  DETER-
 MINED  BY  THE  PRECEDING ENROLLMENT, OF THE THEN ENROLLED VOTERS OF THE
 PARTY RESIDING WITHIN THE POLITICAL UNIT IN WHICH THE OFFICE OR POSITION
 IS TO BE VOTED FOR,  EXCLUDING  VOTERS  IN  INACTIVE  STATUS.  PROVIDED,
 HOWEVER,  THAT THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL NOT APPLY TO DESIGNATING PETITIONS
 FOR CONGRESSIONAL OR STATEWIDE OFFICES.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00440-02-4