# Prohibits reckless driving in parking lots

**Bill ID:** S760BB
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** John Liu
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S760B PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S760B)

## Summary

Prohibits reckless driving in parking lots.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  760--B
  Cal. No. 725
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 6, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  LIU  --  read  twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation -- reported
  favorably from said committee, ordered to  first  and  second  report,
  ordered  to  a third reading, amended and ordered reprinted, retaining
  its place in the order of third reading -- again amended  and  ordered
  reprinted, retaining its place in the order of third reading
 
 AN  ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation to prohibiting
  reckless driving in parking lots
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  1212 of the vehicle and traffic law, as added by
 chapter 47 of the laws of 1988, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 1212. Reckless driving. (A) Reckless driving shall mean  driving  or
 using  any  motor  vehicle, motorcycle or any other vehicle propelled by
 any power other than muscular power or any appliance or accessory there-
 of in a manner which unreasonably interferes with the  free  and  proper
 use  of the public highway OR ANY PARKING LOT, or unreasonably endangers
 users of the public highway OR ANY  PARKING  LOT.  Reckless  driving  is
 prohibited.  Every  person violating this provision shall be guilty of a
 misdemeanor.
  (B) AS USED IN THIS SECTION, "PARKING LOT"  SHALL  MEAN  ANY  AREA  OR
 AREAS  OF  PRIVATE PROPERTY, INCLUDING A DRIVEWAY, NEAR OR CONTIGUOUS TO
 AND PROVIDED IN CONNECTION WITH PREMISES AND USED AS A MEANS  OF  ACCESS
 TO AND EGRESS FROM A PUBLIC HIGHWAY TO SUCH PREMISES AND HAVING A CAPAC-
 ITY  FOR  THE  PARKING OF FOUR OR MORE MOTOR VEHICLES. THE PROVISIONS OF
 THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY TO ANY AREA OR AREAS  OF  PRIVATE  PROPERTY
 COMPRISING  ALL  OR  PART  OF PROPERTY ON WHICH IS SITUATED A ONE OR TWO
 FAMILY RESIDENCE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02750-07-3