# Enacts the "red tape reduction act"

**Bill ID:** S869
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Robert Ortt
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S869 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S869)

## Summary

Requires that new administrative rules that imposes a new administrative burden on a business shall be offset by the repeal of an existing rule.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  869
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 6, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  ORTT  --  read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Commerce, Economic  Devel-
  opment and Small Business
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the state administrative procedure act, in relation to
  enacting the "red tape reduction act"

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  This act shall be known and may be cited as the "red tape
 reduction act".
  ยง 2. Section 202 of the state administrative procedure act is  amended
 by adding a new subdivision 1-a to read as follows:
  1-A.  BUSINESS  BURDEN OFFSET. (A) IF A RULE IS ADOPTED THAT IMPOSES A
 NEW ADMINISTRATIVE BURDEN ON A BUSINESS, ONE OR MORE EXISTING RULES MUST
 BE AMENDED OR REPEALED TO OFFSET THE COST  OF  SUCH  NEW  ADMINISTRATIVE
 BURDEN  AGAINST THE COST OF AN EXISTING ADMINISTRATIVE BURDEN ON A BUSI-
 NESS.
  (B) EVERY NOTICE OF PROPOSED RULEMAKING, EXCEPT THOSE SUBMITTED SOLELY
 FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROPOSING A CONSENSUS RULE, SHALL,  IF  THE  PROPOSED
 RULE WOULD IMPOSE A NEW ADMINISTRATIVE BURDEN ON A BUSINESS, INCLUDE THE
 EXISTING  RULE  OR RULES TO BE AMENDED OR REPEALED TO OFFSET THE COST OF
 SUCH NEW ADMINISTRATIVE BURDEN.
  (C) THE AMENDMENT OR REPEAL OF A RULE UNDER THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL NOT
 COMPROMISE OR ENDANGER THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY OR ECONOMY OF THE STATE
 OR ITS CITIZENS.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately and shall apply to notices
 of proposed rulemaking submitted on or after such date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03686-01-3