# Relates to authorizing the building inspector in the town of Pendleton, county of Niagara, to reside outside of such town

**Bill ID:** S872
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Robert Ortt
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S872 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S872)

## Summary

Relates to authorizing the building inspector in the town of Pendleton, county of Niagara, to reside outside of such town.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  872
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 6, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  ORTT  --  read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Local Government
 
 AN ACT to amend the town law and the public officers law, in relation to
  authorizing the building inspector in the town of Pendleton, county of
  Niagara, to reside outside such town

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  23  of  the  town law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 36 to read as follows:
  36. NOTWITHSTANDING SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION, IN  THE  TOWN  OF
 PENDLETON,  NIAGARA COUNTY, THE PERSON PERFORMING THE FUNCTION OF BUILD-
 ING INSPECTOR NEED NOT BE AN ELECTOR OF SUCH  TOWN.  PROVIDED,  HOWEVER,
 THE  PERSON  PERFORMING  THE FUNCTION OF BUILDING INSPECTOR IN ANY OTHER
 TOWN SHALL BE AN ELECTOR OF SUCH TOWN, UNLESS OTHERWISE PROVIDED  BY  AN
 ACT OF THE STATE LEGISLATURE.
  ยง  2.  Section 3 of the public officers law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 73 to read as follows:
  73. IN THE TOWN OF PENDLETON, NIAGARA COUNTY, THE PROVISIONS  OF  THIS
 SECTION REQUIRING A PERSON TO BE A RESIDENT OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
 OR  MUNICIPAL  CORPORATION  OF  THE  STATE  FOR WHICH HE OR SHE SHALL BE
 CHOSEN, OR WITHIN WHICH HIS OR HER OFFICIAL FUNCTION IS REQUIRED  TO  BE
 EXERCISED,  SHALL NOT PREVENT A PERSON FROM HOLDING THE OFFICE OF BUILD-
 ING INSPECTOR OF THE TOWN OF PENDLETON, NIAGARA  COUNTY;  PROVIDED  THAT
 SAID  PERSON  RESIDES  IN THE COUNTY IN WHICH SUCH TOWN IS LOCATED OR AN
 ADJOINING COUNTY WITHIN THE STATE OF NEW YORK.  PROVIDED, HOWEVER,  THE
 PERSON  PERFORMING THE FUNCTIONS OF BUILDING INSPECTOR IN ANY OTHER TOWN
 SHALL BE A RESIDENT OF SUCH TOWN, UNLESS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03714-01-3