# Relates to unauthorized use of a mobile telephone or any data contained therein

**Bill ID:** S947
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Kevin Thomas
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S947 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2023/S947)

## Summary

Relates to unauthorized use of a smart phone or mobile device or any data contained therein.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  947
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 9, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  THOMAS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation  to  unauthorized  use  of  a
  smart phone or mobile device or any data contained therein
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 1 of  section  156.00  of  the  penal  law,  as
 amended  by  chapter  558  of  the laws of 2006, is  amended  and a new
 subdivision 10 is added to read as follows:
  1. "Computer" means a device or group of  devices  which,  by  manipu-
 lation  of  electronic,  magnetic,  optical or electrochemical impulses,
 pursuant to a computer program, can  automatically  perform  arithmetic,
 logical,  storage  or retrieval operations with or on computer data, and
 includes any connected or directly related device, equipment or facility
 which enables such computer to store, retrieve or communicate to or from
 a person, another computer or another device  the  results  of  computer
 operations,  computer  programs  or computer data.  FOR THE PURPOSES OF
 THIS ARTICLE, A SMART PHONE OR  MOBILE  DEVICE  SHALL  BE  CONSIDERED  A
 COMPUTER.
  10.  "SMART  PHONE OR MOBILE DEVICE" MEANS A PORTABLE COMPUTING DEVICE
 THAT: (A) HAS A SMALL FORM FACTOR SUCH THAT IT CAN EASILY BE CARRIED  BY
 A  SINGLE  INDIVIDUAL;  (B)  IS  DESIGNED  TO OPERATE WITHOUT A PHYSICAL
 CONNECTION; (C) POSSESSES LOCAL, NON-REMOVABLE OR REMOVABLE  DATA  STOR-
 AGE; AND (D) INCLUDES A SELF-CONTAINED POWER SOURCE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01653-01-3