# Establishes a community solar pilot program

**Bill ID:** A7240
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Jo Anne Simon
**Status:** In Assembly Committee

## Summary

Establishes a community solar pilot program to promote the use of community solar energy.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7240
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 15, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. SIMON -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Energy
 
 AN ACT to amend the public service law, in  relation  to  the  community
  solar pilot program
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The public service law is amended by adding a  new  section
 66-w to read as follows:
  ยง  66-W. COMMUNITY SOLAR PILOT PROGRAM. 1. THE COMMISSION SHALL ESTAB-
 LISH A NEW YORK STATE PILOT PROGRAM PROMOTING THE USE OF COMMUNITY SOLAR
 ENERGY.
  2. THE COMMISSION  SHALL  OVERSEE  THE  IMPLEMENTATION  OF  THE  PILOT
 PROGRAM  AND  SHALL  ISSUE  AN  ORDER  OF THE COMMISSION AUTHORIZING THE
 CONSTRUCTION OF A SOLAR INSTALLATION.
  3. THE COMMISSION SHALL INVITE CONSUMERS TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM
 AS SUBSCRIBERS, PROVIDED THAT:
  A. THE COMMISSION SHALL SET A  SUBSCRIPTION  SCHEDULE,  INCLUDING  THE
 PRICE PER WATT TO SUBSCRIBE AND THE PERCENTAGE OF THE TOTAL INSTALLATION
 EACH SUBSCRIPTION LEVEL SHALL REPRESENT;
  B. SUBSCRIBERS SHALL MAKE A ONE TIME PAYMENT TO THE COMMISSION AND, IN
 RETURN,  SUBSCRIBERS  SHALL  BE PAID A QUARTERLY DIVIDEND FOR THE ENERGY
 GENERATED BY THE WATTS COVERED BY THEIR SUBSCRIPTION LEVEL;
  C. A CONSUMER SHALL BE PAID ON A QUARTERLY BASIS BASED ON THE  CONSUM-
 ER'S SUBSCRIPTION LEVEL;
  D.  THE COMMISSION SHALL SET A MAXIMUM NUMBER OF SUBSCRIPTIONS AT EACH
 LEVEL; AND
  E. THE MINIMUM PRICE PER SUBSCRIPTION SHALL NOT  EXCEED  FIVE  HUNDRED
 DOLLARS.
  4.  ALL  ENERGY GENERATED BY THE SOLAR INSTALLATION SHALL BE SOLD BACK
 TO AN INVESTOR-OWNED UTILITY.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09683-02-3
 A. 7240  2
 
  5.  ONE PERCENT OF ALL PAYMENTS DUE TO SUBSCRIBERS SHALL  BE  HELD  BY
 THE COMMISSION TO PAY FOR THE CAPITAL INVESTMENT INTO THE ORIGINAL SOLAR
 INSTALLATION. AFTER THE ORIGINAL INSTALLATION HAS BEEN PAID IN FULL, THE
 ONE  PERCENT  HELD  BY  THE  COMMISSION  SHALL BE USED TO FUND NEW SOLAR
 INSTALLATIONS IN THE SAME MANNER.
  6.  THE  STATE SHALL RETAIN OWNERSHIP OF THE SOLAR INSTALLATION AND OF
 ANY RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS GENERATED BY THE INSTALLATION.
  7. SUBSCRIBERS SHALL BE PAID FOR ENERGY GENERATED AT THE  RETAIL  RATE
 AND NOT AT THE AVOIDED-COST RATE.
  8.  THE  MAXIMUM  SIZE OF THE INSTALLATION SHALL BE TWO THOUSAND KILO-
 WATTS.
  9. SUBSCRIPTIONS MAY NOT BE RESOLD TO ANY ENTITY OTHER THAN THE STATE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.