# Provides for requirements for the rental of helmets

**Bill ID:** A10054
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Erik Dilan
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10054 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10054)

## Summary

Requires every person, corporation, association or partnership who rents helmets or provides helmets to customers as part of their business to ensure that such helmets are undamaged.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10054
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 2, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. DILAN -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Consumer Affairs and Protection
 
 AN ACT to amend the general business law, in  relation  to  requirements
  for the rental of helmets
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Short title. This act shall be known and may  be  cited  as
 the "safe helmet act".
  ยง  2. The general business law is amended by adding a new section 391-
 cc to read as follows:
  ยง 391-CC. RENTAL OF HELMETS. 1. NO PERSON, CORPORATION, ASSOCIATION OR
 PARTNERSHIP WHO RENTS HELMETS OR PROVIDES HELMETS TO CUSTOMERS  AS  PART
 OF  THEIR  BUSINESS  SHALL  RENT OR PROVIDE A HELMET THAT HAS PREVIOUSLY
 SUSTAINED AN IMPACT.
  2. (A) (I) EVERY PERSON, CORPORATION, ASSOCIATION OR  PARTNERSHIP  WHO
 RENTS HELMETS OR PROVIDES HELMETS TO CUSTOMERS AS PART OF THEIR BUSINESS
 SHALL  DIRECTLY  INQUIRE  FROM  EVERY CUSTOMER ABOUT WHETHER ANY IMPACTS
 HAVE BEEN SUSTAINED TO A RENTED OR PROVIDED HELMET UPON  THE  RETURN  OF
 SUCH HELMET.
  (II)  EVERY  PERSON, CORPORATION, ASSOCIATION OR PARTNERSHIP WHO RENTS
 HELMETS OR PROVIDES HELMETS TO CUSTOMERS AS PART OF THEIR BUSINESS SHALL
 KEEP A WRITTEN RECORD OF EVERY NOTIFICATION OF AN IMPACT PROVIDED  BY  A
 CUSTOMER PURSUANT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.
  (B)  NO  PERSON,  CORPORATION,  ASSOCIATION  OR  PARTNERSHIP WHO RENTS
 HELMETS OR PROVIDES HELMETS TO  CUSTOMERS  AS  PART  OF  THEIR  BUSINESS
 SHALL:
  (I)  CHARGE A CUSTOMER A FEE OR PENALTY IF A HELMET RENTED OR PROVIDED
 TO SUCH CUSTOMER SUSTAINED AN IMPACT WHILE IN  THE  POSSESSION  OF  SUCH
 CUSTOMER; OR
  (II)  PROVIDE  A  DISCOUNT  OR INCENTIVE TO A CUSTOMER FOR RETURNING A
 RENTED OR PROVIDED HELMET UNDAMAGED.
  3. NO  PERSON,  CORPORATION,  ASSOCIATION  OR  PARTNERSHIP  WHO  RENTS
 HELMETS OR PROVIDES HELMETS TO CUSTOMERS AS PART OF THEIR BUSINESS SHALL
 STORE A HELMET WHICH HAS SUSTAINED AN IMPACT WITH UNDAMAGED HELMETS.
  ยง  3.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15322-02-4