# Establishes the "Mariah N. Lacey-Reid Law" which aids designated hotline centers in developing protocols for terminating calls to the suicide prevention and behavioral health crisis hotline

**Bill ID:** A10099A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Marianne Buttenschon
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10099A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10099A)

## Summary

Develops protocols that designated hotline centers play calming music while callers are on hold, regular "comfort" messages, and if necessary, the hotline center shall provide additional messaging to encourage the caller to stay on the line.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10099
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  BUTTENSCHON -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Mental Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the mental hygiene law, in relation to establishing  the
  "Mariah  N. Lacey-Reid Law" which prohibits designated hotline centers
  from terminating calls to the suicide prevention and behavioral health
  crisis hotline

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Short  title.  This act shall be known and cited as the
 "Mariah N.  Lacey-Reid Law".
  ยง 2. Section 36.03 of the mental hygiene law is amended  by  adding  a
 new subdivision (g) to read as follows:
  (G)  A  DESIGNATED  HOTLINE CENTER SHALL NOT TERMINATE A CALL WITH ANY
 PERSON. IF THERE IS NO BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AVAILABLE TO SPEAK
 WITH A CALLER, SUCH CALLER SHALL BE PLACED ON HOLD. A DESIGNATED HOTLINE
 CENTER SHALL RECORD A MESSAGE TO BE PLAYED WHILE A CALLER  IS  ON  HOLD.
 SUCH  MESSAGE  SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO COPING MECHANISMS TO
 ASSIST INDIVIDUALS IN MANAGING BEHAVIORAL HEALTH ISSUES. IF A DESIGNATED
 HOTLINE CENTER WISHES TO PLAY MUSIC WHILE A  CALLER  IS  ON  HOLD,  SUCH
 DESIGNATED  HOTLINE  CENTER  SHALL ONLY PLAY MUSIC THAT IS DETERMINED BY
 BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS TO BE CALMING.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15333-02-4