# Relates to concealment of identity in a lawful or unlawful assembly or riot

**Bill ID:** A10057A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jeffrey Dinowitz
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10057A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10057A)

## Summary

Establishes the offense of concealment of identity in a lawful assembly, unlawful assembly or riot.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10057
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 2, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. DINOWITZ -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Codes
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the penal law, in relation to unlawful concealment of
  identity
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 240.12 to
 read as follows:
 ยง 240.12 CONCEALMENT OF IDENTITY IN A LAWFUL ASSEMBLY,  UNLAWFUL  ASSEM-
  BLY, OR RIOT.
  1.  IT  SHALL  BE  UNLAWFUL  FOR  ANY PERSON OR PERSONS, INVOLVED IN A
 LAWFUL ASSEMBLY, UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY, OR RIOT, TO WEAR A  HOOD,  MASK,  OR
 DEVICE  WHEREBY  THE  PERSON  OR THE PERSON'S FACE IS DISGUISED SO AS TO
 CONCEAL THE IDENTITY OF THE WEARER. THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY TO  ANY
 PERSON  OR PERSONS WEARING PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT FOR THE PURPOSE
 OF ENSURING THE PHYSICAL HEALTH OR SAFETY OF THE WEARER OR OTHERS DURING
 A DECLARED PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY.
  2. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "PERSONAL  PROTECTIVE  EQUIPMENT"
 SHALL MEAN ALL EQUIPMENT WORN OR USED TO MINIMIZE EXPOSURE TO A COMMUNI-
 CABLE  DISEASE,  INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO FACE COVERINGS DESIGNED TO
 MINIMIZE EXPOSURE TO A COMMUNICABLE DISEASE AND FACE SHIELDS.
  CONCEALMENT OF IDENTITY IN A LAWFUL ASSEMBLY,  UNLAWFUL  ASSEMBLY,  OR
 RIOT IS A VIOLATION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15380-01-4