# Requires the department of transportation to develop an updated New York state bicycle and pedestrian plan

**Bill ID:** A10094
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Anna Kelles
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10094 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10094)

## Summary

Requires the department of transportation to develop an updated New York state bicycle and pedestrian plan adapted from the department's nineteen hundred ninety-seven New York state bicycle and pedestrian plan, to be re-evaluated and updated every five years.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10094
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. KELLES -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Transportation
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the transportation law, in relation to requiring the
  department of transportation to develop  an  updated  New  York  state
  bicycle and pedestrian plan
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 14 of the transportation law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 37 to read as follows:
  37. (A) TO DEVELOP AN UPDATED NEW YORK STATE  BICYCLE  AND  PEDESTRIAN
 PLAN,  ADAPTED  FROM  THE DEPARTMENT'S NINETEEN HUNDRED NINETY-SEVEN NEW
 YORK STATE BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN PLAN FOR ACTION ON INFRASTRUCTURE  AND
 PROGRAMMING, AND IDENTIFY STEPS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION, INTEGRATION, AND
 EVALUATION OF SUCH PLAN.
  (B)  SUCH UPDATED PLAN SHALL ADDRESS CHANGING CIRCUMSTANCES IN BICYCLE
 AND PEDESTRIAN POLICY, INCLUDING BUT  NOT  LIMITED  TO  BICYCLE  SHARING
 PROGRAMS,  THE  STATE'S  COMPLETE  STREETS  PROGRAMS PURSUANT TO SECTION
 THREE HUNDRED THIRTY-ONE OF THE HIGHWAY LAW, THE EXPANSION  OF  ELECTRIC
 SCOOTERS  AND  BICYCLES  WITH ELECTRIC ASSIST AS DEFINED BY SECTIONS ONE
 HUNDRED FOURTEEN-E AND ONE HUNDRED TWO-C OF THE VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC LAW,
 AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR UPDATES TO STATE LAWS AND POLICIES TO  ENCOURAGE
 BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN SAFETY.
  (C)  SUCH UPDATED PLAN SHALL BE DEVELOPED NO LATER THAN DECEMBER THIR-
 TY-FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE AND SHALL BE RE-EVALUATED AND UPDATED
 PURSUANT TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBDIVISION EVERY FIVE YEARS THERE-
 AFTER. SUCH PLAN SHALL BE MADE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE UPON ITS DEVELOPMENT.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11786-01-3