# Prohibits motor vehicle manufacturers from using or disclosing certain consumer data

**Bill ID:** A10029
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Charles Lavine
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10029 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10029)

## Summary

Prohibits motor vehicle manufacturers from using or disclosing to a third party any data regarding the driving behavior of consumers for use by a motor vehicle insurer.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10029
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 1, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. LAVINE -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Consumer Affairs and Protection
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the general business law, in relation to prohibiting
  motor vehicle manufacturers from using or disclosing certain  consumer
  data
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The general business law is amended by adding a new section
 198-d to read as follows:
  ยง 198-D. DRIVING BEHAVIOR DATA  COLLECTION  PROHIBITED.  (A)  FOR  THE
 PURPOSES  OF  THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING
 MEANINGS:
  (1) "CONSUMER" MEANS THE PURCHASER, LESSEE OR TRANSFEREE,  OTHER  THAN
 FOR PURPOSES OF RESALE, OF A MOTOR VEHICLE.
  (2)  "AUTOMATED VEHICLE" MEANS A MOTOR VEHICLE THAT HAS THE CAPABILITY
 TO DRIVE THE VEHICLE WITHOUT THE ACTIVE CONTROL OR MONITORING OF A HUMAN
 OPERATOR.
  (3) "CONNECTED VEHICLE" MEANS A MOTOR  VEHICLE  THAT  CAN  COMMUNICATE
 BIDIRECTIONALLY WITH OTHER SYSTEMS OUTSIDE OF SUCH VEHICLE.
  (B)  A  MOTOR  VEHICLE  MANUFACTURER THAT PRODUCES AND SELLS AUTOMATED
 VEHICLES OR CONNECTED VEHICLES SHALL NOT USE  OR  DISCLOSE  TO  A  THIRD
 PARTY  ANY DATA REGARDING THE DRIVING BEHAVIOR OF CONSUMERS FOR USE BY A
 MOTOR VEHICLE INSURER.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15298-01-4