# Requires the department of motor vehicles compile a list of veterans who apply for a veteran driver's license

**Bill ID:** A10082
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kimberly Jean-Pierre
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10082 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10082)

## Summary

Requires the department of motor vehicles compile a list of veterans who apply for a veteran driver's license and provide such list to the department of veterans' services to aid in outreach efforts by the department of veterans' services.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10082
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  JEAN-PIERRE -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law and the  veterans'  services
  law,  in  relation to requiring the department of motor vehicles share
  certain veteran information with the department of veterans' services
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  vehicle  and  traffic law is amended by adding a new
 section 504-a to read as follows:
  ยง 504-A. DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES REPORTING OF VETERAN STATUS.  1.
 FOR  THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "VETERAN" SHALL HAVE THE SAME MEANING
 AS SUCH TERM IS DEFINED IN SECTION THIRTY-TWO OF THE  VETERANS'  SERVICE
 LAW.
  2.  THE  DEPARTMENT  SHALL  CREATE AND MAINTAIN A LIST OF VETERANS WHO
 APPLY FOR A VETERAN DRIVER'S LICENSE PURSUANT TO  SECTION  FIVE  HUNDRED
 FOUR  OF  THIS  ARTICLE. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL PROVIDE SUCH LIST TO THE
 DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS' SERVICES TO ASSIST THE DEPARTMENT  OF  VETERANS'
 SERVICES  IN  OUTREACH  EFFORTS REGARDING AVAILABLE SERVICES TO VETERANS
 AND SHALL UPDATE SUCH LIST AS NECESSARY TO ENSURE SUCH LIST IS CURRENT.
  ยง 2. Subdivision 36 of section 4 of  the  veterans'  services  law  is
 amended to read as follows:
  36.  To  coordinate  outreach  efforts  that  ensure  members  of  the
 uniformed services and veterans who are residents  of  this  state,  and
 their families, are made aware of services for veterans from any depart-
 ments,  divisions, boards, bureaus, commissions or agencies of the state
 or any political subdivision of this state.  THE DEPARTMENT  IN  COORDI-
 NATING  SUCH  OUTREACH EFFORTS SHALL UTILIZE A LIST OF VETERANS PROVIDED
 BY THE DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF
 SECTION FIVE HUNDRED FOUR-A OF THE VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC LAW.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14683-01-4