# Establishes the "Hoosock and Jensen law" which increases the designation of certain offenses relating to unlawfully fleeing a police officer

**Bill ID:** A10101A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Marianne Buttenschon
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10101A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10101A)

## Summary

Designates unlawful fleeing a police officer in a motor vehicle in the third degree as a class E felony; designates unlawful fleeing a police officer in a motor vehicle in the second degree as a class D violent felony offense; designates unlawful fleeing a police officer in a motor vehicle in the first degree as a class B violent felony offense.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10101
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  BUTTENSCHON -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to establishing the  "Hoosack
  and  Jensen  law"  which increases the designation of certain offenses
  relating to unlawfully fleeing a police officer
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Short  title. This act shall be known and may be cited as
 the "Hoosack and Jensen law".
  ยง 2. The second undesignated paragraph of section 270.25 of the  penal
 law,  as added by chapter 738 of the laws of 2006, is amended to read as
 follows:
  Unlawful fleeing a police officer in a  motor  vehicle  in  the  third
 degree is a class [A misdemeanor] E FELONY.
  ยง  3. The second undesignated paragraph of section 270.30 of the penal
 law, as added by chapter 738 of the laws of 2006, is amended to read  as
 follows:
  Unlawful  fleeing  a  police  officer in a motor vehicle in the second
 degree is a class [E] D VIOLENT felony OFFENSE.
  ยง 4. The second undesignated paragraph of section 270.35 of the  penal
 law,  as added by chapter 738 of the laws of 2006, is amended to read as
 follows:
  Unlawful fleeing a police officer in a  motor  vehicle  in  the  first
 degree is a class [D] B VIOLENT felony OFFENSE.
  ยง 5. This act shall take effect on the first of November next succeed-
 ing the date on which it shall have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15347-02-4