# Directs the department of education to establish model codes of conduct on school property regarding cellphone use

**Bill ID:** A10174
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Keith Brown
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10174 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10174)

## Summary

Directs the department of education to establish model codes of conduct on school property regarding cellphone use.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10174
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 10, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by COMMITTEE ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. K. Brown) --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Education
 
 AN  ACT to amend the education law, in relation to directing the depart-
  ment of education to establish model codes of conduct on school  prop-
  erty regarding cellphone use
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 2801-c
 to read as follows:
  ยง 2801-C. MODEL CODES OF CONDUCT ON SCHOOL  PROPERTY.  THE  DEPARTMENT
 SHALL, IN COLLABORATION WITH THE NEW YORK STATE COUNCIL OF SCHOOL SUPER-
 INTENDENTS  AND  THE  NEW  YORK STATE SCHOOL BOARDS ASSOCIATION, PRODUCE
 MODEL CODES OF CONDUCT ON SCHOOL PROPERTY FOR  ANY  BUILDING,  STRUCTURE
 AND SURROUNDING OUTDOOR GROUNDS, INCLUDING ENTRANCES OR EXITS, CONTAINED
 WITHIN  A  PUBLIC  OR  PRIVATE PRE-SCHOOL, NURSERY SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY OR
 SECONDARY SCHOOL'S LEGALLY DEFINED PROPERTY BOUNDARIES AS REGISTERED  IN
 A  COUNTY CLERK'S OFFICE. SUCH MODEL CODES OF CONDUCT SHALL INCLUDE, BUT
 NOT BE LIMITED TO, THE USE OF CELLPHONES BY STUDENTS DURING SCHOOL HOURS
 AND DURING CLASSROOM INSTRUCTION. SUCH MODEL CODES SHALL  BE  POSTED  TO
 THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE.
  ยง  2.  This act shall take effect on the first of July next succeeding
 the date on which it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the
 addition, amendment and/or repeal of any rule  or  regulation  necessary
 for  the implementation of this act on its effective date are authorized
 to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15431-01-4