# Relates to ADA or handicapped parking spaces at an arena

**Bill ID:** A10181
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jake Ryan Blumencranz
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10181 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10181)

## Summary

Requires all ADA or handicapped parking spaces at an arena, entertainment or sports venue shall be directly outside the entrance door to the building as stated in federal law; provides that failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall result in an automatic suspension of any New York liquor license held by such venue for a period of one week for each day in which such venue is noncompliant; makes related provisions.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10181
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 10, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by COMMITTEE ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Blumencranz)
  -- read once and referred to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation to ADA or hand-
  icapped parking at an arena
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1.  The vehicle and traffic law is amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 1203-g-1 to read as follows:
  §  1203-G-1. ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES AT STADIUMS, ARENAS, BALLPARKS,
 ENTERTAINMENT AND SPORTS VENUES. 1. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY  LAW,  RULE,  OR
 REGULATION  TO THE CONTRARY, ALL ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES AT ANY STADI-
 UM, ARENA, BALLPARK, ENTERTAINMENT OR SPORTS  VENUE  SHALL  BE  IN  FULL
 COMPLIANCE  WITH THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (42 U.S.C. §§ 12101
 ET SEQ.); LOCATED ON THE SHORTEST ACCESSIBLE  ROUTE  TO  THE  ACCESSIBLE
 ENTRANCE  IN  CONFORMITY  WITH  THE  AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (42
 U.S.C. §§ 12101 ET SEQ.); AND SHALL BE  PROVIDED  AT  THE  LOWEST  PRICE
 CHARGED FOR PARKING AT SUCH PARKING FACILITY ON SUCH DATE.
  2.  ALL  ACCESSIBLE  PARKING  SPACES  AT ANY STADIUM, ARENA, BALLPARK,
 ENTERTAINMENT OR SPORTS VENUE SHALL BE IN COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PROVISION
 WITHIN THIRTY DAYS OF THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION.
  3. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THIS PROVISION AND THE AMERICANS WITH  DISA-
 BILITIES  ACT  (42  U.S.C. §§ 12101 ET SEQ.) AS IT RELATES TO ACCESSIBLE
 PARKING SPACES SHALL RESULT IN THE AUTOMATIC SUSPENSION OF ANY NEW  YORK
 STATE  LIQUOR  LICENSE  HELD  BY SUCH VENUE FOR A PERIOD OF THIRTY DAYS.
 SUCH FAILURE TO COMPLY SHALL ALSO RESULT IN A SUSPENSION OF ANY NEW YORK
 STATE LIQUOR LICENSE HELD BY SUCH VENUE FOR A PERIOD  OF  ONE  WEEK  FOR
 EACH  DAY  IN WHICH SUCH VENUE IS  NONCOMPLIANT. NO LIQUOR SHALL BE SOLD
 AT SUCH VENUE DURING ANY PERIOD OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11004-02-4