# Mandates that purchasers of new vehicles complete a form authorizing or rejecting the placement of a tracking device in such vehicle, to be used by law enforcement if such vehicle is reported stolen

**Bill ID:** A10102
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Marianne Buttenschon
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10102 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10102)

## Summary

Mandates that purchasers of new vehicles complete a form authorizing or rejecting the placement of a tracking device in such vehicle, to be used by law enforcement if such vehicle is reported stolen; authorizes law enforcement to recover the stolen vehicle through electronic means, physical means, or any other method necessary to recover such vehicle as quickly as possible.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10102
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  BUTTENSCHON -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in  relation  to  mandating
  that purchasers of new vehicles complete a form authorizing or reject-
  ing  the placement of a tracking device in such vehicle, to be used by
  law enforcement if such vehicle is reported stolen

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  vehicle  and  traffic law is amended by adding a new
 section 397-d to read as follows:
  ยง 397-D. MOTOR VEHICLE THEFT TRACKER. 1. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL DEVEL-
 OP AN AUTHORIZATION FORM, TO BE PROVIDED TO NEW MOTOR VEHICLE PURCHASERS
 AT THE POINT OF SALE BY THE MOTOR  VEHICLE  DEALER,  THAT  AUTHORIZES  A
 TRACKING  DEVICE  APPROVED  BY THE STATE POLICE TO BE PLACED IN SUCH NEW
 MOTOR VEHICLE AND ALLOWS LAW ENFORCEMENT TO TRACK SUCH MOTOR VEHICLE  IF
 SUCH MOTOR VEHICLE IS REPORTED AS STOLEN. SUCH FORM SHALL GIVE NEW MOTOR
 VEHICLE  PURCHASERS  THE  OPTION TO AUTHORIZE OR REJECT THE PLACEMENT OF
 SUCH TRACKING DEVICE, AND SHALL BE COMPLETED BEFORE THE SALE OF SUCH NEW
 MOTOR VEHICLE IS COMPLETE. SUCH FORM SHALL  ALSO  INCLUDE  AUTHORIZATION
 FOR  LAW  ENFORCEMENT  TO  RECOVER THE STOLEN VEHICLE THROUGH ELECTRONIC
 MEANS, PHYSICAL MEANS, OR ANY OTHER METHOD  NECESSARY  TO  RECOVER  SUCH
 VEHICLE AS QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE.
  2. IF A PURCHASER AUTHORIZES THE PLACEMENT OF A TRACKING DEVICE PURSU-
 ANT  TO  SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION, THE MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER SHALL
 PLACE SUCH APPROVED TRACKING DEVICE IN THE  NEW  MOTOR  VEHICLE.  A  LAW
 ENFORCEMENT  AGENCY  OR ENTITY SHALL ONLY ACCESS AND UTILIZE SUCH DEVICE
 IF SUCH MOTOR VEHICLE IS REPORTED AS STOLEN THROUGH AN  OFFICIAL  POLICE
 REPORT, TO LOCATE AND RECOVER SUCH VEHICLE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15414-01-4