# Directs the department of education to establish model codes of conduct on school property regarding cellphone use

**Bill ID:** A10390
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kenny Burgos
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [A10390 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10390)

## Summary

Directs the department of education to establish model codes of conduct on school property regarding cellphone use.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10390
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 21, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Burgos) --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to directing the  depart-
  ment  of education to establish model codes of conduct on school prop-
  erty regarding cellphone use
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 2801-c
 to read as follows:
  ยง  2801-C.  MODEL  CODES OF CONDUCT ON SCHOOL PROPERTY. THE DEPARTMENT
 SHALL, IN COLLABORATION WITH THE NEW YORK STATE COUNCIL OF SCHOOL SUPER-
 INTENDENTS AND THE NEW YORK STATE  SCHOOL  BOARDS  ASSOCIATION,  PRODUCE
 MODEL  CODES  OF  CONDUCT ON SCHOOL PROPERTY FOR ANY BUILDING, STRUCTURE
 AND SURROUNDING OUTDOOR GROUNDS, INCLUDING ENTRANCES OR EXITS, CONTAINED
 WITHIN A PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PRE-SCHOOL,  NURSERY  SCHOOL,  ELEMENTARY  OR
 SECONDARY  SCHOOL'S LEGALLY DEFINED PROPERTY BOUNDARIES AS REGISTERED IN
 A COUNTY CLERK'S OFFICE. SUCH MODEL CODES OF CONDUCT SHALL INCLUDE,  BUT
 NOT  BE  LIMITED  TO,  THE  USE  OF CELLPHONES BY STUDENTS DURING SCHOOL
 HOURS.  SUCH MODEL CODES SHALL BE POSTED TO THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE.
  ยง 2. The education law is amended by adding a  new  section  409-n  to
 read as follows:
  ยง 409-N. CELLPHONE POLICY. THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OR TRUSTEES OF EVERY
 SCHOOL DISTRICT OR, IN THE CASE OF THE CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT OF NEW YORK,
 THE  CHANCELLOR,  AND  EVERY  BOARD OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES,
 CHARTER SCHOOL AND NONPUBLIC SCHOOL WITHIN THE STATE SHALL DEVELOP POLI-
 CIES AND PROCEDURES FOR THE USE OF CELLPHONES BY STUDENTS DURING  SCHOOL
 HOURS.
  ยง  3.  This act shall take effect on the first of July next succeeding
 the date on which it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the
 addition, amendment and/or repeal of any rule  or  regulation  necessary
 for  the implementation of this act on its effective date are authorized
 to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15634-02-4