# Removes the requirement of the state liquor authority to have not more than two members of the authority belong to the same political party

**Bill ID:** A10387
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Rodneyse Bichotte Hermelyn
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10387 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10387)

## Summary

Removes the requirement of the state liquor authority to have not more than two members of the authority belong to the same political party.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10387
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 21, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE  ON  RULES  --  (at  request  of  M.  of  A.
  Bichotte Hermelyn) -- read once  and  referred  to  the  Committee  on
  Economic Development
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  alcoholic  beverage control law, in relation to
  removing the requirement of the state liquor  authority  to  have  not
  more  than  two  members of the authority belong to the same political
  party

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  11  of  the  alcoholic  beverage control law, as
 amended by section 2 of part E of chapter 57 of the  laws  of  2011,  is
 amended to read as follows:
  ยง  11. Appointment of authority. The members of the authority shall be
 appointed by the governor by and with the  advice  and  consent  of  the
 senate.  [Not more than two members of the authority shall belong to the
 same political party.] The chairman  of  the  state  alcoholic  beverage
 control  board  heretofore  appointed and designated by the governor and
 the remaining members of such board heretofore appointed by the governor
 shall continue to serve as chairman and members of the  authority  until
 the  expiration  of  the respective terms for which they were appointed.
 Upon the expiration of such respective  terms  the  successors  of  such
 chairman  and  members  shall  be appointed to serve for a term of three
 years each and until their successors have been appointed and qualified.
 The commissioners, other than the chairman shall,  when  performing  the
 work  of  the  authority,  be compensated at a rate of two hundred sixty
 dollars per day, together with an allowance  for  actual  and  necessary
 expenses  incurred  in the discharge of their duties. The chairman shall
 receive an annual salary established in section one  hundred  sixty-nine
 of the executive law.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14790-01-4