# Requires electronic filing of all financial disclosure statements

**Bill ID:** A10382
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Catalina Cruz
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10382 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10382)

## Summary

Requires electronic filing of all financial disclosure statements with the commission on ethics and lobbying in government.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10382
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 21, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE  ON  RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Cruz) --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the public officers law, in relation to requiring  elec-
  tronic filing of all financial disclosure statements
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Subdivision 2 of section 73-a of the public officers law is
 amended by adding a new paragraph (l) to read as follows:
  (L) (I) BEGINNING WITH THE STATEMENT DUE IN CALENDAR YEAR TWO THOUSAND
 TWENTY-FIVE, ALL STATEMENTS SHALL BE SUBMITTED ON THE ELECTRONIC  FILING
 SYSTEM  ADMINISTERED BY THE COMMISSION ON ETHICS AND LOBBYING IN GOVERN-
 MENT.
  (II) ANY INDIVIDUAL REQUIRED TO FILE  A  STATEMENT  PURSUANT  TO  THIS
 SECTION  MAY  REQUEST  FROM  THE  COMMISSION  ON  ETHICS AND LOBBYING IN
 GOVERNMENT OR THE INDIVIDUAL'S APPOINTING AUTHORITY ACCESS TO  AN  ELEC-
 TRONIC  COMPUTER  TERMINAL  TO  FILE  THE  STATEMENT.  AN INDIVIDUAL WHO
 REQUESTS SUCH ACCESS MUST BE PROVIDED ACCESS WITHIN TWO BUSINESS DAYS OF
 SUBMITTING THE REQUEST.
  (III) NO INDIVIDUAL SHALL BE DEEMED  NOT  TO  HAVE  TIMELY  FILED  THE
 STATEMENT IF ACCESS TO AN ELECTRONIC COMPUTER TERMINAL WAS NOT AVAILABLE
 AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.
  (IV)  AN INDIVIDUAL MAY SUBMIT THE STATEMENT ON A FORM SUPPLIED BY THE
 COMMISSION ON ETHICS AND LOBBYING IN GOVERNMENT WITH A WRITTEN  ATTESTA-
 TION  FROM A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER LICENSED HEALTH PROVIDER INDICATING THAT
 THE INDIVIDUAL HAS A DISABILITY OR INFIRMITY PREVENTING  THE  INDIVIDUAL
 FROM  COMPLETING  THE STATEMENT ON THE ELECTRONIC FILING SYSTEM PROVIDED
 BY THE COMMISSION ON ETHICS AND LOBBYING IN GOVERNMENT.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15095-01-4