# Establishes the state university of New York community college workforce guarantee program

**Bill ID:** A10455
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Donna Lupardo
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10455 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10455)

## Summary

Establishes the state university of New York community college workforce guarantee program to assist community colleges to produce job and career-ready workers for high demand sectors based upon their regional employment and business needs.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10455
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 24, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by COMMITTEE ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Lupardo) --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Higher Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to establishing the state
  university of New York community college workforce guarantee program
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Section  6303 of the education law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 7 to read as follows:
  7. THERE IS HEREBY ESTABLISHED THE STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK COMMU-
 NITY COLLEGE WORKFORCE  GUARANTEE  PROGRAM.  SUBJECT  TO  APPROPRIATIONS
 THEREFOR,  THE  STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK COMMUNITY COLLEGE WORKFORCE
 GUARANTEE PROGRAM SHALL ASSIST COMMUNITY COLLEGES TO  PRODUCE  JOB-  AND
 CAREER-READY  WORKERS  FOR  HIGH  DEMAND SECTORS. EACH COMMUNITY COLLEGE
 SHALL DEVELOP PROGRAMS BASED UPON THEIR REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS
 NEEDS WHICH VARY BY REGION. THE PROGRAM SHALL INCLUDE  BOTH  CREDIT  AND
 NON-CREDIT  PROGRAMS  WHICH WILL PROVIDE A JOB-READY WORKFORCE AND SEAM-
 LESS TRANSFER OPTIONS TO FOUR-YEAR DEGREE PROGRAMS.  THE  PROGRAM  SHALL
 FOCUS ON THE HIGH DEMAND JOB SECTORS OF HEALTHCARE, ADVANCED MANUFACTUR-
 ING,  INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY/CYBERSECURITY,  SKILLED  TRADES, AND CLEAN
 ENERGY, BUT MAY ALSO INCLUDE OTHER PROGRAMS BASED UPON REGIONAL DEMANDS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15578-02-4