# Establishes the green transition authority and establishes a for-hire vehicle improvement surcharge; appropriation

**Bill ID:** A10454
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jessica Gonzalez-Rojas
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10454 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10454)

## Summary

Establishes the green transition authority to promote the transition of the for-hire vehicle and other state industries to environmentally sustainable practices and increase universal accessibility of for-hire vehicles, paratransit services, and taxi services statewide; establishes a for-hire vehicle improvement surcharge for each for-hire transportation trip conducted in a transportation network company vehicle or by a high-volume for-hire service; makes an appropriation therefor.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10454
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 24, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by COMMITTEE ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Gonzalez-Ro-
  jas)  --  read  once  and  referred  to the Committee on Corporations,
  Authorities and Commissions
 
 AN ACT to amend the public authorities law, in relation to  establishing
  the  green  transition authority; to amend the tax law, in relation to
  establishing a for-hire vehicle improvement surcharge; and  making  an
  appropriation therefor
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Short title. This act shall be known and may  be  cited  as
 the "green transition authority act".
  §  2.  Legislative findings and declaration. The legislature finds and
 declares that:
  1. New York State's For-Hire Vehicle ("FHV") industry is at the center
 of three interlinked crises that impact FHV drivers, people  with  disa-
 bilities, and the environment. These issues are:
  a. FHV driver poverty. Rideshare driver earnings are in the lowest 10%
 of  all  occupations in the United States. This led the City of New York
 to establish the first-ever pay regulations for app-based  drivers,  but
 long  hours and low pay remain the norm for most of the for-hire vehicle
 industry's 91% immigrant, predominantly people  of  color  workforce  of
 over  60,000 active drivers in NYC and for thousands more drivers across
 the state. Earnings from trips are only half the problem. Union  surveys
 indicate  that  on  average, each driver must spend $31,000 per year for
 the things they need to do their  job:  a  vehicle,  gas,  repairs,  and
 insurance.  Vehicle  costs push drivers into poverty.  Unfunded mandates
 to transition to electric vehicles, such as that  of  the  City  of  New
 York's "Green Rides" program, risk deepening this crisis.
  b.  Climate change. New York's fleet of rideshare vehicles is a major
 source of greenhouse gas emissions that drive  climate  change.  In  New
 York  City  alone, a fleet of 109,000 gasoline-fueled rideshare vehicles
 puts 1.4 million tons of  CO2 into the atmosphere  every  year,  a  62%
 increase  from  2013  to 2018 as the FHV fleet ballooned. Transportation
 generates approximately 30% of New York City's total  carbon  emissions,
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15088-02-4
 A. 10454  2
 
 with  the FHV fleet responsible for a substantial portion of this total.
 The massive increase in emissions from the FHV fleet has moved New  York
 City  away  from the goal established by the City Council of zero carbon
 emissions  by 2050. Statewide, rideshare vehicles are a disproportionate
 driver of greenhouse gas emissions that  cause  climate  change  because
 they  are  on  the  road  more hours than privately used vehicles. Addi-
 tionally, the State is far behind the curve  in  meeting  its  emissions
 reductions  and  renewable  energy production established by the Climate
 Leadership and Community Protection Act (CLCPA).
  c.  Wheelchair accessibility. Very few rideshare vehicles  are  wheel-
 chair  accessible  across New York State. In 2011, people with disabili-
 ties launched a campaign to bring New York  City's  taxicab  fleet  into
 line  with  the  requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. In
 2014, the campaign won a consent decree that mandated that half  of  the
 taxicab fleet of 13,587 vehicles would be made up of Wheelchair Accessi-
 ble Vehicles ("WAVs") by 2020. To fund this mandate, in 2015 the City of
 New  York  created a 30-cent surcharge on all yellow and green cab rides
 to establish a Taxicab  Improvement  Fund  ("TIF")  which  would  issue
 grants  of  up  to  $30,000  to  medallion  owners to buy vehicles. This
 surcharge was recently increased  to  $1/trip.  To  date,  approximately
 4,200  WAV vehicles have been purchased and deployed as taxis, less than
 half the fleet of 13,587 taxis, and around half the medallion fleet  has
 not  come  back  on  the road since the start of the pandemic. As of the
 most recent report,  the  Taxicab  Improvement  Fund  held  $47  million
 unspent  while  the program falls short of its goals of a 50% accessible
 taxi fleet. With no funding available on the For-Hire  Vehicle  side  of
 the  industry, the situation is even worse with only approximately 5,900
 wheelchair-accessible vehicles out of a total of 94,000 FHVs in New York
 City.  Statewide there is no mandate for accessibility, and  wheelchair-
 accessible vehicles are even more scarce.
  2.  It is in the interest of the state to establish a dedicated public
 authority, the Green Transition Authority, to address the  three  crises
 of  driver  poverty,  climate change and wheelchair accessibility in the
 FHV industry. The Green Transition Authority  will  be  able  to  manage
 funding  collected  through a surcharge on FHV rides, additional govern-
 ment appropriations, and bond issuances to:
  a. Work with auto manufacturers and retrofitters  to  rapidly  develop
 and market vehicles that are both zero emissions and wheelchair accessi-
 ble;
  b.  Establish  a  co-investment  program to incentivize and enable FHV
 drivers to purchase zero-emission and wheelchair-accessible vehicles;
  c. Develop electric and zero-emission vehicle charging  infrastructure
 and maintenance facilities;
  d.  Establish  a  voluntary  transition  program for excess drivers to
 receive paid training for employment in green jobs;
  e. Fund other initiatives to advance  economic  development  with  the
 goal  of  decarbonization  of the economy and creating good, green jobs;
 and
  f. Improve paratransit service across New York State.
  3. It is critical that the Green Transition  Authority  represent  the
 public, drivers, autoworkers, environmental justice advocates, and disa-
 bility  justice  advocates,  and be transparent and accountable to these
 stakeholders in managing funding and programs.
  § 3.  Article 8 of the public authorities law is amended by  adding  a
 new title 7 to read as follows:
 A. 10454  3
 
  TITLE 7
  GREEN TRANSITION AUTHORITY
 SECTION 1750. DEFINITIONS.
  1751. GREEN TRANSITION AUTHORITY.
  1752. MEMBERS.
  1753. PURPOSES, POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE AUTHORITY.
  1754. ADDITIONAL POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY.
  1755. GREEN TRANSITION FUND.
  1756. ACCOUNTS AND FUNDING.
  1757. EXEMPTION FROM TAXES, ASSESSMENTS AND CERTAIN FEES.
  1758. AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT.
  1759. LABOR AND PROCUREMENT STANDARDS.
  1760. BONDS AND NOTES.
  1761. RESERVE FUNDS AND APPROPRIATIONS.
  1762. EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION OF BONDS AND NOTES.
  1763. BONDS AND NOTES LEGAL INVESTMENTS FOR FIDUCIARIES.
  1764. RIGHT OF STATE TO REQUIRE REDEMPTION OF BONDS.
  1765. RIGHTS AND REMEDIES OF BONDHOLDERS AND NOTEHOLDERS.
  1766. STATE NOT LIABLE ON BONDS AND NOTES.
  §  1750. DEFINITIONS.  AS USED OR REFERRED TO IN THIS TITLE, UNLESS A
 DIFFERENT MEANING CLEARLY APPEARS FROM THE CONTEXT:
  1. "AUTHORITY" MEANS THE GREEN TRANSITION AUTHORITY ESTABLISHED PURSU-
 ANT TO SECTION SEVENTEEN HUNDRED FIFTY-ONE OF THIS TITLE.
  2. "DISADVANTAGED COMMUNITIES" MEANS COMMUNITIES THAT BEAR THE BURDENS
 OF NEGATIVE PUBLIC HEALTH EFFECTS, ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION, AND  IMPACTS
 OF  CLIMATE CHANGE, AND POSSESS CERTAIN SOCIOECONOMIC CRITERIA, AS IDEN-
 TIFIED PURSUANT TO SECTION 75-0111  OF  THE  ENVIRONMENTAL  CONSERVATION
 LAW,  OR  AS IDENTIFIED PURSUANT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S JUSTICE40
 INITIATIVE, INCLUDING PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES.
  3. "DISADVANTAGED WORKER" MEANS A RESIDENT OF NEW YORK STATE WHO:
  (A) IS A WOMAN, WHEN CONSIDERING CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING CONTRACTS;
  (B) HAS A HOUSEHOLD INCOME OF LESS THAN  FIFTY  PERCENT  OF  THE  AREA
 MEDIAN INCOME;
  (C) IS AN INDIVIDUAL RESIDING IN AN AREA OF CONCENTRATED POVERTY;
  (D) IS DISABLED;
  (E) IS A VETERAN;
  (F)  IS A  PERSON  PREVIOUSLY  INCARCERATED  OR  CONVICTED  OF A CRIM-
 INAL OFFENSE; OR
  (G) IS LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYED.
  4.  "DOWNSTATE  REGION"  MEANS THAT PORTION OF THE STATE THAT INCLUDES
 EACH OF THE FOLLOWING COUNTIES: NASSAU, SUFFOLK, PUTNAM, ROCKLAND, WEST-
 CHESTER, BRONX, KINGS, NEW YORK, QUEENS, AND RICHMOND.
  5. "ELECTRIC VEHICLE" MEANS A VEHICLE  POWERED  ONLY  BY  AN  ELECTRIC
 MOTOR  THAT  DRAWS  CURRENT  FROM  RECHARGEABLE  STORAGE BATTERIES, FUEL
 CELLS, PHOTOVOLTAIC ARRAYS, OR OTHER SOURCES OF ELECTRIC CURRENT.
  6. "ELECTRIC  VEHICLE  CHARGING  INFRASTRUCTURE"  MEANS  ANY  PHYSICAL
 INFRASTRUCTURE  REQUIRED FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARG-
 ING STATIONS OR ANY RELATED  EQUIPMENT  NEEDED  TO  FACILITATE  CHARGING
 ELECTRIC VEHICLES.
  7.  "ELECTRIC  VEHICLE  CHARGING  STATION" MEANS STATIONS THAT DELIVER
 ELECTRICITY FROM A SOURCE OUTSIDE AN ELECTRIC VEHICLE INTO ONE  OR  MORE
 ELECTRIC VEHICLES.
  8. "ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE PRACTICES" MEANS PRACTICES THAT PRIOR-
 ITIZE  THE  RESPONSIBLE  USE OF NATURAL RESOURCES TO MAINTAIN ECOLOGICAL
 BALANCE AND ENSURE THE CONSERVATION OF RESOURCES FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS.
 A. 10454  4
 
  9. "FOR-HIRE VEHICLE" MEANS ANY TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY VEHICLE
 ("TNC VEHICLE") AS DEFINED IN SECTION SIXTEEN HUNDRED NINETY-ONE OF  THE
 VEHICLE  AND  TRAFFIC LAW AND ANY FOR-HIRE VEHICLE AS DEFINED IN SECTION
 19-502 OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK.
  10.  "FOR-HIRE  VEHICLE  IMPROVEMENT SURCHARGE" MEANS THE SURCHARGE ON
 FOR-HIRE  VEHICLE  TRANSPORTATION  TRIPS  IMPOSED  UNDER  ARTICLE
 TWENTY-NINE-E OF THE TAX LAW.
  11.  "GREEN  JOB" MEANS EMPLOYMENT WITHIN INDUSTRIES THAT EMPLOY ENVI-
 RONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE PRACTICES.
  12. "UPSTATE REGION" MEANS THAT PORTION OF  THE  STATE  THAT  INCLUDES
 EACH AND EVERY COUNTY OF THE STATE NOT INCLUDED IN THE DOWNSTATE REGION.
  13.  "WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE  VEHICLE"  MEANS A VEHICLE EQUIPPED WITH A
 HYDRAULIC LIFT OR RAMPS DESIGNED FOR THE PURPOSE OF TRANSPORTING PERSONS
 IN WHEELCHAIRS OR CONTAINING ANY OTHER  PHYSICAL  DEVICE  OR  ALTERATION
 DESIGNED  TO  PERMIT  ACCESS TO AND ENABLE THE TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONS
 WITH DISABILITIES.
  14. "ZERO-EMISSION VEHICLE" MEANS A VEHICLE THAT  PRODUCES  NO  DIRECT
 EXHAUST OR TAILPIPE EMISSIONS AND INCLUDES, BUT IS NOT LIMITED TO, ELEC-
 TRIC VEHICLES.
  15. "PRESIDENT" MEANS THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE AUTHORITY.
  16. "PARATRANSIT" MEANS  TRANSPORTATION SERVICE REQUIRED BY THE FEDER-
 AL AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES WHO
 ARE  UNABLE  TO  USE FIXED ROUTE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS AS DEFINED IN 49
 CFR § 37.3.
  § 1751. GREEN TRANSITION AUTHORITY. THERE IS HEREBY CREATED THE  GREEN
 TRANSITION AUTHORITY.  THE AUTHORITY SHALL BE A BODY CORPORATE AND POLI-
 TIC CONSTITUTING A PUBLIC BENEFIT CORPORATION.
  §  1752.  MEMBERS.  1.  THE  AUTHORITY  SHALL CONSIST OF ELEVEN VOTING
 MEMBERS, WHO SHALL BE APPOINTED AS FOLLOWS: TWO SHALL BE REPRESENTATIVES
 OF ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE ORGANIZATIONS, ONE OF WHOM SHALL  BE  APPOINTED
 BY  THE  GOVERNOR,  AND ONE OF WHOM SHALL BE APPOINTED BY THE SPEAKER OF
 THE ASSEMBLY; TWO SHALL BE REPRESENTATIVES OF DISABILITY JUSTICE  ORGAN-
 IZATIONS,  ONE  OF  WHOM  SHALL BE APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR, AND ONE OF
 WHOM SHALL BE APPOINTED BY THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT OF  THE  SENATE;  ONE
 SHALL  BE A REPRESENTATIVE OF A NEW YORK STATE WORKER COOPERATIVE CORPO-
 RATION OWNED BY DRIVERS LICENSED BY THE NEW YORK CITY TAXI AND LIMOUSINE
 COMMISSION AND SHALL BE APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR; ONE SHALL BE A REPRE-
 SENTATIVE OF AN ORGANIZATION WITH A TRACK RECORD  OF  ADVOCATING  FOR  A
 TRANSITION  TO  ELECTRIC  AND WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE VEHICLES IN THE FOR-
 HIRE VEHICLE INDUSTRY AND SHALL BE  APPOINTED  BY  THE  SPEAKER  OF  THE
 ASSEMBLY; ONE SHALL BE A REPRESENTATIVE OF A LABOR UNION THAT REPRESENTS
 PARATRANSIT  DRIVERS  IN  NEW  YORK  STATE AND SHALL BE APPOINTED BY THE
 GOVERNOR; ONE SHALL BE A REPRESENTATIVE OF AN AUTOMOTIVE WORKERS'  UNION
 AND  SHALL  BE  APPOINTED  BY THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE; ONE
 SHALL BE A REPRESENTATIVE OF AN ELECTRICAL WORKERS' UNION AND  SHALL  BE
 APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR; AND TWO SHALL BE APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR AS
 AT-LARGE  REPRESENTATIVES  OF  THE  PUBLIC.  FIVE OF THE MEMBERS SHALL
 RESIDE IN THE UPSTATE REGION OF THE STATE AND SIX OF THE  MEMBERS  SHALL
 RESIDE IN THE DOWNSTATE REGION.  ALL OF THE APPOINTED MEMBERS SHALL HAVE
 RELEVANT  EXPERIENCE IN ANY OR ALL OF THE FOLLOWING AREAS: ENVIRONMENTAL
 JUSTICE, DISABILITY JUSTICE, ENERGY MARKETS, ENERGY SYSTEMS,  ORGANIZED
 LABOR,  WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT, SUSTAINABLE LAND USE, TRANSPORTATION, AND
 CLEAN ENERGY.
  2. ALL MEMBERS SHALL CONTINUE TO HOLD OFFICE  UNTIL  THEIR  SUCCESSORS
 ARE  APPOINTED AND QUALIFY. OF THE APPOINTED MEMBERS, SIX OF THE MEMBERS
 APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR SHALL SERVE INITIAL TERMS OF FOUR YEARS, WHILE
 A. 10454  5
 
 THE REMAINING FIVE MEMBERS SHALL SERVE INITIAL  TERMS  OF  THREE  YEARS.
 THEREAFTER, ALL TERMS SHALL BE FOR A PERIOD OF FOUR YEARS.
  3.  VACANCIES  SHALL  BE  FILLED  IN  THE MANNER PROVIDED FOR ORIGINAL
 APPOINTMENTS. MEMBERS MAY BE REMOVED FROM OFFICE FOR  THE  SAME  REASONS
 AND  IN  THE  SAME  MANNER  AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW FOR THE REMOVAL OF
 OFFICERS OF A COUNTY.
  4. THE MEMBERS OF THE AUTHORITY SHALL DESIGNATE THE CHAIR.  THE  CHAIR
 SHALL  PRESIDE  OVER  MEETINGS  OF  THE AUTHORITY AND SHALL SERVE AS THE
 PRIMARY LIAISON BETWEEN THE MEMBERS AND AUTHORITY  STAFF.  A  VICE-CHAIR
 MAY BE ELECTED BY THE AUTHORITY FROM AMONG ITS OTHER MEMBERS TO SERVE AS
 SUCH AT THE PLEASURE OF THE AUTHORITY. THE VICE-CHAIR SHALL PRESIDE OVER
 ALL MEETINGS OF THE AUTHORITY IN THE ABSENCE OF THE CHAIR AND SHALL HAVE
 SUCH OTHER DUTIES AS THE AUTHORITY MAY PRESCRIBE. THE PRESIDENT SHALL BE
 THE  CHIEF  EXECUTIVE  OFFICER  OF  THE AUTHORITY AND SHALL BE PRIMARILY
 RESPONSIBLE FOR THE DISCHARGE OF THE EXECUTIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE  FUNC-
 TIONS OF THE AUTHORITY.
  5.  THE  MEMBERS  OF  THE  AUTHORITY SHALL RECEIVE NO COMPENSATION FOR
 THEIR SERVICES BUT SHALL BE REIMBURSED FOR ALL OTHER ACTUAL  AND  NECES-
 SARY  EXPENSES  INCURRED  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  THE  CARRYING OUT OF THE
 PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE.
  § 1753. PURPOSES, POWERS AND  DUTIES  OF  THE  AUTHORITY.  1.  THE
 PURPOSES  OF  THE  AUTHORITY  SHALL  BE TO PROMOTE THE TRANSITION OF THE
 FOR-HIRE VEHICLE AND OTHER STATE INDUSTRIES TO ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINA-
 BLE PRACTICES AND INCREASE UNIVERSAL ACCESSIBILITY OF FOR-HIRE VEHICLES,
 PARATRANSIT SERVICES, AND TAXI SERVICES STATEWIDE.
  2.  EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE LIMITED BY THIS  TITLE,  THE  AUTHORITY  SHALL
 HAVE THE POWER TO:
  (A)  SUE AND BE SUED;
  (B) HAVE A SEAL OR ALTER SUCH SEAL AT PLEASURE;
  (C)  MAKE AND ALTER BY-LAWS FOR ITS ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT AND TO
 MAKE AND ALTER RULES AND  REGULATIONS  GOVERNING  THE  EXERCISE  OF  ITS
 POWERS AND FULFILLMENT OF ITS PURPOSES UNDER THIS TITLE;
  (D) MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE EXERCISE OF ITS CORPORATE
 POWERS  AND  THE  FULFILLMENT OF ITS CORPORATE PURPOSES UNDER THIS TITLE
 AND TITLE NINE-A OF THIS ARTICLE, WHICH SHALL BE FILED WITH THE  DEPART-
 MENT  OF  STATE IN THE MANNER PROVIDED BY SECTION ONE HUNDRED TWO OF THE
 EXECUTIVE LAW;
  (E) APPOINT SUCH OFFICERS,  AGENTS, AND  EMPLOYEES, WITHOUT REGARD  TO
 ANY  PERSONNEL OR CIVIL SERVICE LAW, RULE OR REGULATION OF THE STATE AND
 IN ACCORDANCE WITH GUIDELINES  ADOPTED  BY  THE  AUTHORITY,  AS  IT  MAY
 REQUIRE FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF ITS DUTIES AND TO FIX AND DETERMINE THEIR
 QUALIFICATIONS, DUTIES AND COMPENSATION;
  (F)  ACQUIRE,  LEASE, HOLD, AND DISPOSE OF REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY,
 WHETHER TANGIBLE OR INTANGIBLE, OR ANY INTEREST THEREIN, BY ANY METHOD;
  (G) MAKE AND EXECUTE AGREEMENTS, CONTRACTS OR OTHER INSTRUMENTS NECES-
 SARY OR CONVENIENT FOR THE EXERCISE OF ITS FUNCTIONS, POWERS AND  DUTIES
 UNDER THIS TITLE;
  (H) FIX AND COLLECT FEES, RENTALS AND CHARGES FOR THE USE OF ANY PROP-
 ERTY OR FACILITY UNDER ITS JURISDICTION, OR FOR THE SALE OF ANY PRODUCT,
 BY-PRODUCT  OR SERVICE PRODUCED IN OR PROVIDED BY ANY SUCH FACILITY, AND
 ESTABLISH THE RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES CREATED UPON PAYMENT  THEREOF.  SUCH
 FEES, RENTALS AND CHARGES SHALL BE ESTABLISHED BY THE AUTHORITY SO AS TO
 PRODUCE, IN THE JUDGMENT OF THE AUTHORITY, REVENUES SUFFICIENT, TOGETHER
 WITH ANY OTHER FUNDS AVAILABLE TO THE AUTHORITY, TO MEET THE EXPENSES OF
 MAINTENANCE  AND  OPERATION OF THE FACILITIES OF THE AUTHORITY, TO REPAY
 ANY MONEYS REPAYABLE TO THE STATE, TO FULFILL THE  TERMS  OF  AGREEMENTS
 A. 10454  6
 
 WITH  THE  HOLDERS  OF  ITS  BONDS,  NOTES, OR OTHER OBLIGATIONS, AND TO
 PROVIDE FUNDS FOR SUCH OTHER CORPORATE PURPOSES  AS  THE  AUTHORITY  MAY
 DEEM APPROPRIATE;
  (I)  BORROW MONEY AND ISSUE SUCH NOTES, BONDS, OR OTHER OBLIGATIONS IN
 RELATION TO SUCH INDEBTEDNESS, AND SECURE ANY OF ITS  OBLIGATIONS  BY
 MORTGAGE  OR PLEDGE OF ALL OR ANY OF ITS PROPERTY OR ANY INTEREST THERE-
 IN, WHEREVER SITUATED;
  (J) ARRANGE FOR GUARANTEES OF ITS BONDS, NOTES, OR  OTHER  OBLIGATIONS
 BY  THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OR BY ANY PRIVATE INSURER OR OTHERWISE AND TO
 PAY ANY PREMIUMS THEREFOR;
  (K) PURCHASE BONDS, NOTES, OR OTHER OBLIGATIONS OF  THE  AUTHORITY  AT
 SUCH PRICE OR PRICES AS THE AUTHORITY MAY DETERMINE;
  (L)  LEND MONEY, INVEST AND REINVEST ITS FUNDS, AND TAKE AND HOLD REAL
 AND PERSONAL PROPERTY AS SECURITY FOR THE PAYMENT OF FUNDS SO LOANED  OR
 INVESTED;
  (M)  PROCURE  INSURANCE  OR  OBTAIN  INDEMNIFICATION  FROM THE FEDERAL
 GOVERNMENT OR OTHER PERSONS AGAINST ANY  LOSS  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  ITS
 PROPERTIES  OR OPERATIONS IN SUCH AMOUNT OR AMOUNTS AND FROM SUCH INSUR-
 ERS, INCLUDING THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT,  AS  IT  MAY  DEEM  NECESSARY  OR
 DESIRABLE, AND TO PAY ANY PREMIUMS THEREFOR;
  (N) ACCEPT ANY GIFTS OR GRANTS OR LOANS OF FUNDS OR PROPERTY OR FINAN-
 CIAL  OR OTHER AID IN ANY FORM FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OR ANY AGENCY
 OR INSTRUMENTALITY THEREOF, THE STATE,  OR  ANY  OTHER  SOURCE,  AND  TO
 COMPLY  WITH  THE  PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE AND THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS
 THEREOF;
  (O) ENGAGE THE SERVICES OF BOND COUNSEL, FINANCIAL ADVISORS,  ACCOUNT-
 ANTS,  ENGINEERS, ATTORNEYS, AND OTHER PRIVATE CONSULTANTS ON A CONTRACT
 BASIS FOR RENDERING PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND ADVICE;
  (P) CREATE OR ACQUIRE ONE OR MORE WHOLLY-OWNED SUBSIDIARIES AS MAY  BE
 NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE;
  (Q)  NEGOTIATE  AND  ENTER  INTO AGREEMENTS WITH TRUSTEES OR RECEIVERS
 APPOINTED BY UNITED STATES BANKRUPTCY COURTS OR FEDERAL DISTRICT  COURTS
 OR  IN OTHER PROCEEDINGS INVOLVING ADJUSTMENT OF DEBTS, AND TO AUTHORIZE
 LEGAL COUNSEL FOR THE AUTHORITY TO APPEAR IN ANY SUCH PROCEEDINGS;
  (R) FILE A PETITION UNDER CHAPTER NINE OF TITLE ELEVEN OF  THE  UNITED
 STATES  BANKRUPTCY CODE, OR TAKE OTHER SIMILAR ACTION FOR THE ADJUSTMENT
 OF ITS DEBTS;
  (S) ENTER INTO MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS FOR THE OPERATION OF ALL  OR  ANY
 OF THE PROPERTY OR FACILITIES OWNED BY THE AUTHORITY;
  (T) MAINTAIN AN OFFICE OR OFFICES AT SUCH PLACE OR PLACES IN THE STATE
 AS IT MAY DETERMINE;
  (U)  MAKE  ANY  INQUIRY,  INVESTIGATION,  SURVEY,  OR  STUDY WHICH THE
 AUTHORITY MAY DEEM  NECESSARY TO ENABLE IT TO EFFECTIVELY CARRY OUT  THE
 PROVISIONS  OF  THIS  TITLE  AND TO REQUIRE THE  PRODUCTION OF RECORDS,
 BOOKS, PAPERS, ACCOUNTS, AND OTHER DOCUMENTS, INCLUDING PUBLIC  RECORDS,
 AND TO MAKE COPIES THEREOF OR EXTRACTS THEREFROM;
  (V)  ADOPT,  REVISE,  AMEND,  AND  REPEAL  RULES  AND REGULATIONS WITH
 RESPECT TO ITS OPERATIONS, PROPERTIES, FACILITIES, AND PROJECTS  AS  MAY
 BE  NECESSARY  OR  CONVENIENT  TO  CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE,
 SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE STATE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT;
  (W) FROM TIME TO TIME ENTER INTO AGREEMENTS WITH THE  NEW  YORK  STATE
 ENERGY  RESEARCH  AND  DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY, THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRON-
 MENTAL CONSERVATION, THE NEW YORK POWER  AUTHORITY,  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF
 LABOR, THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE, THE METROPOLITAN TRANSPORTATION AUTHORI-
 TY,  THE  TAXI  AND LIMOUSINE COMMISSION OR ANY OTHER RELEVANT ENTITY TO
 FINANCE THE CAPITAL COSTS OF PROJECTS  AUTHORIZED  PURSUANT  TO  SECTION
 A. 10454  7
 
 EIGHTY-EIGHT-B  OF  THE  STATE FINANCE LAW, AND TO ISSUE BONDS AND NOTES
 FOR CAPITAL PROJECTS APPROVED BY THE BOARD; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT EACH
 PROVISION OF THIS TITLE RELATING TO BONDS AND NOTES WHICH ARE NOT INCON-
 SISTENT WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION SHALL APPLY TO THE BONDS AND
 NOTES AUTHORIZED BY THIS SECTION;
  (X) REQUEST SUPPORT AND SERVICES TO THE AUTHORITY FROM ANY OTHER STATE
 AGENCY OR AUTHORITY;
  (Y) LEVY FINES AND FEES;
  (Z)  ESTABLISH  AND  ISSUE GRANTS FOR PROGRAMS, JOBS, UPGRADES, OR FOR
 ANY OTHER PURPOSE WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THE AUTHORITY; AND
  (AA) PRIORITIZE GRANTING FUNDS TO PROJECTS, PROGRAMS  AND  INITIATIVES
 IN DISADVANTAGED COMMUNITIES OR DISADVANTAGED WORKERS.
  3. (A) THE AUTHORITY SHALL NOT GIVE, GRANT, GIFT, OR LOAN MONEY TO ANY
 PROJECTS,  JOBS,  PROGRAMS,  OR  INITIATIVES  THAT FURTHER DEPENDENCE ON
 FOSSIL FUELS.
  (B) THE AUTHORITY SHALL NOT GRANT OR GIFT MONEY TO ANY PROJECTS, JOBS,
 PROGRAMS, OR INITIATIVES WHOSE SHARES CONTAIN A FIFTY PERCENT OR GREATER
 INTEREST FROM A FOSSIL FUEL COMPANY OR THAT ARE BEING LED  BY  A  FOSSIL
 FUEL COMPANY.
  (C)  THE  AUTHORITY  SHALL NOT GIVE, GRANT, GIFT, OR LOAN MONEY TO ANY
 PROJECTS, JOBS,  PROGRAMS  OR  INITIATIVES  THAT  USE  BLUE,  TURQUOISE,
 BROWN/BLACK, YELLOW, WHITE OR GREY HYDROGEN, OR ANY COMBINATION THEREOF,
 OR  THE  PRODUCTION  THEREOF  IN  ANY  AMOUNT. ANY USE OF SUCH COLORS OF
 HYDROGEN THAT ARE COMBINED WITH GREEN HYDROGEN  SHALL  NOT  RECEIVE  ANY
 FUNDING FROM THE AUTHORITY.
  § 1754. ADDITIONAL POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY.  IN ADDITION TO THE POWERS
 ENUMERATED  IN  SECTION SEVENTEEN HUNDRED FIFTY-THREE OF THIS TITLE, THE
 AUTHORITY SHALL HAVE THE POWER AND OBLIGATION TO:
  1. COLLECT DATA FROM TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY PROVIDERS  OPERAT-
 ING IN THE STATE INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO: (A) THE NUMBER OF WHEEL-
 CHAIR-ACCESSIBLE  AND  ELECTRIC  VEHICLES  OPERATING  IN  EACH COUNTY OR
 REGION; (B) THE NUMBER OF TRIPS, AND MILEAGE DRIVEN BY TNC VEHICLES; AND
 (C) THE ANNUAL ESTIMATED EMISSIONS OF TNC VEHICLES STATEWIDE;
  2. CONDUCT AND PUBLISH ANNUAL STUDIES OF THE FOR-HIRE VEHICLE INDUSTRY
 TO SET STANDARDS AND GOALS FOR THE TRANSITION OF  THE  FOR-HIRE  VEHICLE
 INDUSTRY TO THE EXCLUSIVE USE OF ZERO-EMISSION AND WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE
 VEHICLES;
  3.  CONVENE  A GREEN AND ACCESSIBLE VEHICLE TASKFORCE, INCLUDING ENVI-
 RONMENTAL JUSTICE, DISABILITY  JUSTICE,  AND  LABOR  ADVOCATES  TO:  (A)
 ASSESS THE AVAILABILITY OF ZERO-EMISSION AND WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE VEHI-
 CLES; (B) WORK WITH GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES AND AUTOMAKERS TO ENSURE THAT
 VEHICLES  MEETING  APPROPRIATE ENVIRONMENTAL AND ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS
 ARE BROUGHT TO MARKET; AND (C) VET VEHICLES ELIGIBLE  FOR  INCLUSION  IN
 THE  CO-INVESTMENT  PROGRAM PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION FOUR OF THIS SECTION
 BASED ON THEIR AVAILABLE FEATURES  AND  THE  AUTOMAKERS'  COMMITMENT  TO
 LABOR, SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS;
  4.  ADMINISTER  A CO-INVESTMENT PROGRAM FOR THE PURCHASE OF QUALIFYING
 VEHICLES, UNDER THE TERMS OF WHICH FOR-HIRE  VEHICLE  DRIVERS  SHALL  BE
 ELIGIBLE FOR A VOUCHER OF AN AMOUNT AND UNDER THE TERMS TO BE DETERMINED
 BY  THE  AUTHORITY  TOWARD  THE  PURCHASE  OF ZERO-EMISSION VEHICLES AND
 WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE VEHICLES APPROVED FOR INCLUSION IN THE PROGRAM  BY
 THE GREEN AND ACCESSIBLE VEHICLE TASKFORCE PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION THREE
 OF THIS SECTION;
  5.  AFTER  ZERO-EMISSION  AND WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE VEHICLE TRANSITION
 GOALS ARE MET, DEVELOP AND ADMINISTER A VOLUNTARY PROGRAM FOR DRIVERS OF
 A. 10454  8
 
 FOR-HIRE VEHICLES TO RECEIVE TRAINING AND  FINANCIAL  SUPPORT  TO  ENTER
 INTO ALTERNATIVE EMPLOYMENT IN PUBLIC SERVICE OR GREEN JOBS;
  6.  FUND  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIRED TO SUPPORT THE
 EXPANDING USE OF ZERO-EMISSION VEHICLES, INCLUDING BUT  NOT  LIMITED  TO
 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE;
  7.  FUND  THE  PURCHASE OF ACCESSIBLE ELECTRIC AND ZERO-EMISSION VEHI-
 CLES, EXCLUDING ANY HYDROGEN-BASED VEHICLES THAT OPERATE ON ANY COLOR OF
 HYDROGEN OTHER THAN GREEN HYDROGEN, AND INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO TRANSI-
 TION PUBLIC PARATRANSIT SERVICES TO ZERO-EMISSION VEHICLES;
  8. ANY AND ALL OTHER ACTIVITIES THAT PROMOTE AND HELP  ACHIEVE  GREEN-
 HOUSE GAS REDUCTION AND COMPLIANCE WITH THE STATE'S EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS
 MANDATES  UNDER THE CLIMATE LEADERSHIP AND COMMUNITY PROTECTION ACT, THE
 CITY OF NEW YORK'S 80 X 2050 INITIATIVE AND LOCAL LAW  NINETY-SEVEN,  OR
 FUTURE  REQUIREMENTS  FOR ADDITIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS
 THAT THE LEGISLATURE MAY IMPOSE, AND INFRASTRUCTURE  TO  ENVIRONMENTALLY
 SUSTAINABLE PRACTICES, AND IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST; AND
  9.  FUND  PROGRAMS  TO  EXPAND  AND IMPROVE RELIABILITY OF PARATRANSIT
 SERVICES IN THE STATE INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO:  (A)  PURCHASE  AND
 OPERATION  OF  ACCESSIBLE ZERO-EMISSION VEHICLES BY PARATRANSIT AGENCIES
 AND THEIR CONTRACTORS; (B) EXPANSION OF AND ONGOING SUPPORT  FOR  ON-DE-
 MAND PARATRANSIT SERVICE; (C) EXPANSION OF PARATRANSIT SERVICE TO BROAD-
 ER  GEOGRAPHIC  AREAS;  AND  (D)  OTHER INNOVATIVE PROJECTS THAT SEEK TO
 ENHANCE PARATRANSIT SERVICE QUALITY THROUGH IMPROVED TECHNOLOGY,  EDUCA-
 TION, AND OTHER STRATEGIES.
  §  1755.  GREEN  TRANSITION  FUND.  1.  THE AUTHORITY SHALL CREATE AND
 ESTABLISH A FUND TO BE KNOWN AS THE "GREEN TRANSITION FUND" WHICH  SHALL
 BE  KEPT SEPARATE FROM AND SHALL NOT BE COMMINGLED WITH ANY OTHER MONEYS
 OF THE AUTHORITY. THE GREEN TRANSITION  FUND  SHALL  CONSIST  OF  MONEYS
 RECEIVED  BY  THE AUTHORITY PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION TWELVE
 HUNDRED NINETY-NINE-FF OF THE TAX LAW IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE  PROVISIONS
 THEREOF.
  2.  MONEYS  IN  THE  FUND SHALL BE USED FOR THE EXCLUSIVE PURPOSE OF
 FUNDING PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY THE AUTHORITY.
  3. ANY REVENUES DEPOSITED IN THE GREEN  TRANSITION  FUND  PURSUANT  TO
 SUBDIVISION  ONE  OF  THIS  SECTION  SHALL  BE  USED EXCLUSIVELY FOR THE
 PURPOSES DESCRIBED IN SUBDIVISION TWO OF  THIS  SECTION.  SUCH  REVENUES
 SHALL  ONLY  SUPPLEMENT  AND  SHALL  NOT SUPPLANT ANY FEDERAL, STATE, OR
 LOCAL FUNDS EXPENDED BY THE AUTHORITY OR SUCH AUTHORITY'S AFFILIATES  OR
 SUBSIDIARIES FOR SUCH PURPOSES.
  4.  ANY REVENUES DEPOSITED INTO THE GREEN TRANSITION FUND PURSUANT TO
 SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION SHALL NOT BE DIVERTED INTO  THE  GENERAL
 FUND  OF  THE  STATE,  ANY  OTHER FUND MAINTAINED FOR THE SUPPORT OF ANY
 OTHER GOVERNMENTAL PURPOSE, OR FOR ANY OTHER PURPOSE NOT  AUTHORIZED  BY
 SUBDIVISION TWO OF THIS SECTION.
  5.  THE  AUTHORITY  SHALL  REPORT ON THE RECEIPT AND USES OF ALL FUNDS
 RECEIVED BY THE GREEN TRANSITION FUND TO THE DIRECTOR OF THE BUDGET, THE
 TEMPORARY PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE, AND THE SPEAKER OF THE  ASSEMBLY,  ON
 AN ANNUAL BASIS NO LATER THAN THE FIRST DAY OF FEBRUARY.
  §  1756.  ACCOUNTS AND FUNDING.  1. THE PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY THE
 AUTHORITY SHALL BE FUNDED IN PART BY THE GREEN  TRANSITION  FUND  ESTAB-
 LISHED  PURSUANT  TO  SECTION SEVENTEEN HUNDRED FIFTY-FIVE OF THIS TITLE
 AND ANY OTHER MONEYS RECEIVED  BY  THE  AUTHORITY,  INCLUDING  PAYMENTS,
 GIFTS, OR APPROPRIATIONS TO THE AUTHORITY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE.
  2.  THE AUTHORITY SHALL BE AUTHORIZED TO SET A STANDARD RATE FOR VEHI-
 CLE CHARGING STATIONS OWNED BY THE AUTHORITY AND TO COLLECT ANY  REVENUE
 GENERATED FROM SUCH CHARGING STATIONS.
 A. 10454  9

  3.  THE  AUTHORITY  SHALL HAVE THE POWER AND IS HEREBY AUTHORIZED FROM
 TIME TO TIME TO ISSUE ITS NEGOTIABLE BONDS IN CONFORMITY WITH APPLICABLE
 PROVISIONS OF THE UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE FOR ANY PURPOSE AUTHORIZED  BY
 THIS TITLE.
  §  1757.  EXEMPTION  FROM  TAXES, ASSESSMENTS AND CERTAIN FEES.  IT IS
 HEREBY DETERMINED THAT THE CREATION OF THE AUTHORITY  AND  THE  CARRYING
 OUT  OF ITS CORPORATE PURPOSES IS IN ALL RESPECTS FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE
 PEOPLE OF THE MUNICIPALITY AND THE STATE AND IS A PUBLIC PURPOSE AND THE
 AUTHORITY SHALL BE REGARDED AS PERFORMING A GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION IN THE
 EXERCISE OF THE POWERS CONFERRED UPON IT BY THIS TITLE AND SHALL NOT  BE
 REQUIRED  TO PAY ANY TAXES, SPECIAL AD VALOREM LEVIES OR SPECIAL ASSESS-
 MENTS UPON ANY PROPERTY OWNED BY IT OR UNDER ITS  JURISDICTION,  CONTROL
 OR SUPERVISION OR UPON ITS ACTIVITIES OR ANY FILING, RECORDING OR TRANS-
 FER  FEES  OR TAXES IN RELATION TO INSTRUMENTS FILED, RECORDED OR TRANS-
 FERRED BY IT OR ON ITS BEHALF.  THE  CONSTRUCTION,  USE,  OCCUPATION  OR
 POSSESSION  OF  ANY PROPERTY OWNED BY THE AUTHORITY OR THE MUNICIPALITY,
 INCLUDING IMPROVEMENTS THEREON, BY  ANY  PERSON  OR  PUBLIC  CORPORATION
 UNDER A LEASE, LEASE AND SUBLEASE OR ANY OTHER AGREEMENT SHALL NOT OPER-
 ATE  TO  ABROGATE OR LIMIT THE FOREGOING EXEMPTION, NOTWITHSTANDING THAT
 THE LESSEE, USER, OCCUPANT OR PERSON IN POSSESSION SHALL CLAIM OWNERSHIP
 FOR FEDERAL INCOME TAX PURPOSES. MORTGAGES MADE OR FINANCED, DIRECTLY OR
 INDIRECTLY, BY THE AUTHORITY SHALL BE EXEMPT FROM THE MORTGAGE RECORDING
 TAXES IMPOSED BY ARTICLE ELEVEN OF THE TAX LAW. THE AUTHORITY  SHALL  BE
 DEEMED  A  PUBLIC  AUTHORITY  FOR  THE  PURPOSES OF SECTION FOUR HUNDRED
 TWELVE OF THE REAL PROPERTY TAX LAW.
  § 1758. AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT. IN CONFORMITY WITH THE PROVISIONS  OF
 SECTION  FIVE  OF  ARTICLE  TEN OF THE CONSTITUTION, THE ACCOUNTS OF THE
 AUTHORITY SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE SUPERVISION OF THE  STATE  COMPTROLLER
 AND  AN  ANNUAL  AUDIT  SHALL  BE  PERFORMED BY AN INDEPENDENT CERTIFIED
 ACCOUNTANT. THE AUTHORITY SHALL ANNUALLY SUBMIT TO THE  GOVERNOR,  STATE
 COMPTROLLER  AND  STATE  LEGISLATURE  A  DETAILED REPORT PURSUANT TO THE
 PROVISIONS OF SECTION TWENTY-EIGHT HUNDRED OF THIS CHAPTER, AND  A  COPY
 OF  SUCH  REPORT  SHALL BE FILED WITH EVERY MUNICIPALITY INCLUDED IN THE
 REPORT. THE AUTHORITY SHALL COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS TWEN-
 TY-EIGHT HUNDRED ONE, TWENTY-EIGHT HUNDRED TWO AND TWENTY-EIGHT  HUNDRED
 THREE OF THIS CHAPTER.
  § 1759. LABOR AND PROCUREMENT STANDARDS. 1. ANY PROJECT THAT IS FUNDED
 BY THE AUTHORITY SHALL:
  (A)  BE  DEEMED  A PUBLIC WORK PROJECT SUBJECT TO ARTICLE EIGHT OF THE
 LABOR LAW;
  (B) REQUIRE THAT ANY MATERIALS USED IN THE  PROJECT  ARE  PRODUCED  OR
 MADE  IN WHOLE OR SUBSTANTIAL PART IN THE UNITED STATES, ITS TERRITORIES
 OR POSSESSIONS; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT THE AUTHORITY SHALL ESTABLISH  A
 WAIVER  PROCESS  AUTHORIZING  THE PURCHASE OF PROJECT MATERIALS THAT ARE
 PRODUCED OR MADE IN WHOLE OR SUBSTANTIAL  PART  OUTSIDE  OF  THE  UNITED
 STATES, ITS TERRITORIES OR POSSESSIONS WHEN SUCH MATERIALS ARE NOT READ-
 ILY AVAILABLE OR COST-EFFECTIVE;
  (C)  REQUIRE THAT ANY PUBLIC OWNER OR THIRD PARTY ACTING ON THE BEHALF
 OF A PUBLIC OWNER ENTER INTO A PROJECT LABOR  AGREEMENT  AS  DEFINED  BY
 SECTION  TWO  HUNDRED  TWENTY-TWO  OF THE LABOR LAW FOR ALL CONSTRUCTION
 WORK;
  (D) REQUIRE THE PAYMENT OF PREVAILING WAGE STANDARDS  CONSISTENT  WITH
 ARTICLE NINE OF THE LABOR LAW FOR BUILDING SERVICES WORK; AND
  (E)  REQUIRE  THAT  ALL RIGHTS OR BENEFITS, INCLUDING TERMS AND CONDI-
 TIONS OF EMPLOYMENT, AND PROTECTION  OF  CIVIL  SERVICE  AND  COLLECTIVE
 BARGAINING  STATUS  OF ALL EXISTING PUBLIC EMPLOYEES AND THE WORK JURIS-
 A. 10454  10
 
 DICTION, COVERED JOB TITLES, AND WORK  ASSIGNMENTS,  SET  FORTH  IN  THE
 CIVIL SERVICE LAW AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS WITH LABOR ORGAN-
 IZATIONS REPRESENTING PUBLIC EMPLOYEES SHALL BE PRESERVED AND PROTECTED.
  2. ANY SUCH PROJECT SHALL NOT RESULT IN THE:
  (A) DISPLACEMENT OF ANY CURRENTLY EMPLOYED WORKER OR LOSS OF POSITION,
 INCLUDING  PARTIAL DISPLACEMENT SUCH AS A REDUCTION IN THE HOURS OF NON-
 OVERTIME WORK, WAGES, OR EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS, OR RESULT IN  THE  IMPAIR-
 MENT OF EXISTING COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS;
  (B)  TRANSFER  OF EXISTING DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS RELATED TO MAINTENANCE
 AND OPERATIONS PERFORMED BY EXISTING EMPLOYEES OF AUTHORIZED ENTITIES TO
 A CONTRACTING ENTITY; OR
  (C) TRANSFER OF FUTURE DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS  ORDINARILY  PERFORMED  BY
 EMPLOYEES OF AUTHORIZED ENTITIES TO A CONTRACTING ENTITY.
  3. THE AUTHORITY SHALL INCLUDE REQUIREMENTS IN ANY PROCUREMENT THAT:
  (A)  THE  MATERIALS, COMPONENTS, PARTS OR VEHICLES BE PRODUCED OR MADE
 IN WHOLE OR SUBSTANTIAL PART IN THE UNITED STATES,  ITS  TERRITORIES  OR
 POSSESSIONS;  PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT THE PRESIDENT OF THE AUTHORITY, OR
 THE PRESIDENT'S DESIGNEE MAY  WAIVE  THE  PROCUREMENT  REQUIREMENTS  SET
 FORTH  IN  THIS  PARAGRAPH  IF  SUCH  OFFICIAL  DETERMINES THAT: (I) THE
 REQUIREMENTS WOULD NOT BE IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST; (II) THE  REQUIREMENTS
 WOULD  RESULT  IN  UNREASONABLE  COSTS; (III) OBTAINING SUCH INFRASTRUC-
 TURE-RELATED MATERIALS, COMPONENTS OR PARTS IN THE UNITED  STATES  WOULD
 INCREASE  THE  COST  OF A PROJECT BY AN UNREASONABLE AMOUNT; OR (IV) ANY
 SUCH VEHICLES, PARTS, OR COMPONENTS CANNOT BE PRODUCED, MADE, OR  ASSEM-
 BLED IN THE UNITED STATES IN SUFFICIENT AND REASONABLY AVAILABLE QUANTI-
 TIES OR OF SATISFACTORY QUALITY. DETERMINATIONS ON WAIVERS SHALL BE MADE
 ON  AN ANNUAL BASIS NO LATER THAN DECEMBER THIRTY-FIRST, AFTER PROVIDING
 NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC COMMENT, AND SUCH DETERMINATION  SHALL
 BE  MADE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE, IN WRITING, ON THE AUTHORITY'S WEBSITE WITH
 A DETAILED EXPLANATION OF THE FINDINGS LEADING TO SUCH A  DETERMINATION.
 IF  THE  PRESIDENT OR THE PRESIDENT'S DESIGNEE HAS ISSUED DETERMINATIONS
 FOR THREE CONSECUTIVE YEARS FINDING THAT NO  SUCH  WAIVER  IS  WARRANTED
 PURSUANT  TO  THIS  PARAGRAPH,  THEN  THE  AUTHORITY  SHALL NO LONGER BE
 REQUIRED TO PROVIDE THE ANNUAL DETERMINATION REQUIRED BY THIS PARAGRAPH.
  (B) THE AUTHORITY SHALL USE A SYSTEM FOR PROCUREMENT THAT INCORPORATES
 A BEST-VALUE CONTRACTING FRAMEWORK TO CONSIDER  THE  QUALITY,  COST  AND
 EFFICIENCY  OF  OFFERORS  WHEN EVALUATING PROCUREMENT CONTRACT PROPOSALS
 FOR THE PURCHASE OF ZERO-EMISSION VEHICLES AND CHARGING EQUIPMENT.  SUCH
 FRAMEWORK  SHALL  REFLECT, WHENEVER POSSIBLE, OBJECTIVE AND QUANTIFIABLE
 ANALYSIS. SUCH FRAMEWORK SHALL IDENTIFY A QUANTITATIVE FACTOR FOR  OFFE-
 RORS  THAT  PRIORITIZE  AND  INCLUDE  THE  FOLLOWING IN SUCH PROCUREMENT
 CONTRACT PROPOSAL:
  (I) AN EMPLOYMENT PLAN WHICH SHALL INCLUDE BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (1) WORKER WAGES;
  (2) WORKER BENEFITS;
  (3) WORKER SAFETY;
  (4) TRAINING, RETRAINING, AND REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS; AND
  (5) A COMMITMENT TO CREATE HIGH-QUALITY JOBS WITHIN THE STATE  TO  THE
 MAXIMUM  EXTENT  PRACTICABLE FOR DISADVANTAGED OR UNDERREPRESENTED INDI-
 VIDUALS;
  (II) A COMMITMENT TO CONSIDER THE INTERESTS OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNI-
 TY THAT SURROUND SUCH OFFEROR'S FACILITY AND THE INTERESTS OF MEMBERS OF
 THE COMMUNITY FROM WHICH WORKERS ARE RECRUITED;
  (III) A DESCRIPTION OF EFFORTS BY THE OFFEROR TO LOWER GREENHOUSE  GAS
 EMISSIONS AND SUCH OFFEROR'S IMPACT ON CLIMATE CHANGE; AND
 A. 10454  11
 
  (IV)  COMPLIANCE  WITH  LOCAL, STATE, AND FEDERAL LABOR, CIVIL RIGHTS,
 AND ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS. VIOLATIONS OF LOCAL, STATE,  AND
 FEDERAL  LABOR,  CIVIL  RIGHTS,  AND  ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS
 SHALL BE CONSIDERED A NEGATIVE FACTOR  IN  THE  AUTHORITY'S  PROCUREMENT
 FRAMEWORK.
  4.  THE FRAMEWORK ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO PARAGRAPH (B) OF SUBDIVISION
 THREE OF THIS SECTION SHALL INCLUDE A NOTICE TO  OFFERORS  STATING  THAT
 THE  TERMS  AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT AND CONTENT OF EMPLOYMENT PLANS
 AND REPORTS REQUIRED BY SUBDIVISION  THREE  OF  THIS  SECTION  SHALL  BE
 SUBJECT TO DISCLOSURE UNDER THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION LAW; AND
  5.  THE  FINAL PROCUREMENT CONTRACT AND ANY COMPLIANCE DOCUMENTS SHALL
 BE MADE AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC ON THE AUTHORITY'S WEBSITE.
  § 1760. BONDS AND NOTES. 1. THE AUTHORITY SHALL HAVE THE POWER AND  IS
 HEREBY  AUTHORIZED  TO  ISSUE AT ONE TIME OR IN SERIES FROM TIME TO TIME
 ITS NEGOTIABLE BONDS AND NOTES IN CONFORMITY WITH APPLICABLE  PROVISIONS
 OF  THE  UNIFORM  COMMERCIAL  CODE  IN SUCH PRINCIPAL AMOUNTS AS, IN THE
 OPINION OF THE AUTHORITY,  SHALL  BE  NECESSARY  TO  PROVIDE  SUFFICIENT
 MONEYS  FOR  ACHIEVING THE AUTHORITY'S CORPORATE PURPOSES, INCLUDING THE
 ESTABLISHMENT OF RESERVES TO SECURE THE BONDS AND NOTES AND THE  PAYMENT
 OF INTEREST ON BONDS AND NOTES.
  2.  THE AUTHORITY SHALL HAVE POWER FROM TIME TO TIME TO RENEW BONDS OR
 NOTES OR TO ISSUE RENEWAL BONDS OR NOTES  FOR  SUCH  PURPOSE,  TO  ISSUE
 BONDS  OR  NOTES TO PAY BONDS OR NOTES, AND, WHENEVER IT DEEMS REFUNDING
 EXPEDIENT, TO REFUND ANY BOND OR NOTE BY THE ISSUANCE OF  NEW  BONDS  OR
 NOTES,  WHETHER  THE  BONDS  OR  NOTES  TO  BE REFUNDED HAVE OR HAVE NOT
 MATURED, AND MAY ISSUE BONDS OR NOTES PARTLY TO REFUND  BONDS  OR  NOTES
 THEN  OUTSTANDING  AND  PARTLY  FOR  ANY  OTHER CORPORATE PURPOSE OF THE
 AUTHORITY. BONDS OR NOTES ISSUED FOR REFUNDING PURPOSES  SHALL  BE  SOLD
 AND  THE  PROCEEDS APPLIED TO THE PURCHASE, REDEMPTION OR PAYMENT OF THE
 BONDS OR NOTES TO BE REFUNDED.
  3. EXCEPT AS MAY OTHERWISE BE EXPRESSLY  PROVIDED  BY  THE  AUTHORITY,
 EVERY  ISSUE  OF BONDS OR NOTES SHALL BE GENERAL OBLIGATIONS PAYABLE OUT
 OF ANY MONEYS OR REVENUES OF THE AUTHORITY, SUBJECT ONLY TO  ANY  AGREE-
 MENTS WITH THE HOLDERS OF BONDS OR NOTES PLEDGING ANY RECEIPTS OR REVEN-
 UES.
  4.  THE  BONDS  AND  NOTES  SHALL  BE  AUTHORIZED BY RESOLUTION OF THE
 AUTHORITY, SHALL BEAR SUCH DATE OR DATES AND  MATURE  AT  SUCH  TIME  OR
 TIMES  AS  SUCH  RESOLUTION  SHALL  PROVIDE,  EXCEPT  THAT NOTES AND ANY
 RENEWALS THEREOF SHALL MATURE WITHIN FIVE YEARS  FROM  THEIR  RESPECTIVE
 DATES OF ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL, AS THE CASE MAY BE, AND BONDS SHALL MATURE
 WITHIN  FORTY  YEARS FROM THEIR RESPECTIVE DATES OF ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL,
 AS THE CASE MAY BE. THE BONDS AND NOTES SHALL BEAR INTEREST AT SUCH RATE
 OR RATES, BE IN SUCH DENOMINATION, BE IN SUCH  FORM,  EITHER  COUPON  OR
 REGISTERED,  CARRY  SUCH  REGISTRATION  PRIVILEGES,  BE EXECUTED IN SUCH
 MANNER, BE PAYABLE IN SUCH MEDIUM OF PAYMENT AT SUCH  PLACE  OR  PLACES,
 AND  BE SUBJECT TO SUCH TERMS OF REDEMPTION AS SUCH RESOLUTION OR RESOL-
 UTIONS MAY PROVIDE.
  5. BONDS AND NOTES SHALL BE  SOLD  BY  THE  AUTHORITY,  AT  PUBLIC  OR
 PRIVATE  SALE,  AT  SUCH PRICE OR PRICES AS THE AUTHORITY MAY DETERMINE.
 BONDS AND NOTES OF THE AUTHORITY SHALL NOT BE SOLD BY THE  AUTHORITY  AT
 PRIVATE  SALE  UNLESS SUCH SALE AND THE TERMS THEREOF HAVE BEEN APPROVED
 IN WRITING BY THE COMPTROLLER, WHERE SUCH  SALE  IS  NOT  TO  THE  COMP-
 TROLLER,  OR  BY  THE  DIRECTOR OF THE BUDGET, WHERE SUCH SALE IS TO THE
 COMPTROLLER.
  6. IN THE DISCRETION OF THE AUTHORITY ANY BONDS OR ISSUE OF  BONDS  OR
 NOTES  OR ISSUE OF NOTES MAY BE SECURED BY SUCH RESOLUTION OR BY A TRUST
 A. 10454  12
 
 INDENTURE BY AND BETWEEN THE AUTHORITY AND A CORPORATE TRUSTEE WHICH MAY
 BE ANY TRUST COMPANY OR BANK HAVING THE POWERS OF A TRUST COMPANY IN THE
 STATE OR BY A SECURED LOAN AGREEMENT OR OTHER  INSTRUMENT.  SUCH  RESOL-
 UTION,  TRUST  INDENTURE, LOAN AGREEMENT OR OTHER INSTRUMENT MAY CONTAIN
 ANY USUAL OR CUSTOMARY PROVISIONS, COVENANTS OR LIMITATIONS FOR BONDS OR
 NOTES OF SIMILAR NATURE WHICH SHALL BE A PART OF THE CONTRACT  WITH  THE
 HOLDERS  THEREOF, INCLUDING SUCH PROVISIONS FOR PROTECTING AND ENFORCING
 THE RIGHTS AND REMEDIES OF BONDHOLDERS AND NOTEHOLDERS AS MAY BE REASON-
 ABLE AND PROPER AND NOT IN VIOLATION OF LAW.
  7. ANY RESOLUTION OR RESOLUTIONS AUTHORIZING ANY NOTES OR BONDS OR ANY
 ISSUE THEREOF MAY CONTAIN PROVISIONS, WHICH  SHALL  BE  A  PART  OF  THE
 CONTRACT WITH THE HOLDERS THEREOF, AS TO:
  (A)  PLEDGING  ALL OR PART OF THE FEES, CHARGES, GIFTS, GRANTS, RENTS,
 REVENUES OR OTHER MONEYS RECEIVED OR TO BE RECEIVED AND LEASES OR AGREE-
 MENTS TO SECURE THE PAYMENT OF THE NOTES OR BONDS OR OF ANY ISSUE THERE-
 OF SUBJECT TO SUCH AGREEMENTS WITH BONDHOLDERS AND  NOTEHOLDERS  AS  MAY
 THEN EXIST;
  (B)  THE  RATES  OF  THE  FEES  OR  CHARGES TO BE ESTABLISHED, AND THE
 AMOUNTS TO BE RAISED IN EACH YEAR THEREBY AND THE USE AND DISPOSITION OF
 THE FEES, CHARGES,  GIFTS,  GRANTS,  RENTS,  REVENUES  OR  OTHER  MONEYS
 RECEIVED OR TO BE RECEIVED;
  (C) THE SETTING ASIDE OF RESERVES OR SINKING FUNDS, AND THE REGULATION
 AND DISPOSITION THEREOF;
  (D)  LIMITATIONS  ON  THE PURPOSE TO WHICH THE PROCEEDS OF SALE OF ANY
 ISSUE OF NOTES OR BONDS THEN OR THEREAFTER TO BE ISSUED MAY  BE  APPLIED
 AND  PLEDGING  SUCH PROCEEDS TO SECURE THE PAYMENT OF THE NOTES OR BONDS
 OR OF ANY ISSUE THEREOF;
  (E) LIMITATIONS ON THE ISSUANCE OF  ADDITIONAL  NOTES  OR  BONDS;  THE
 TERMS  UPON  WHICH  ADDITIONAL NOTES OR BONDS MAY BE ISSUED AND SECURED;
 THE REFUNDING OF OUTSTANDING OR OTHER NOTES OR BONDS;
  (F) THE PROCEDURE, IF ANY, BY WHICH THE TERMS  OF  ANY  CONTRACT  WITH
 BONDHOLDERS  OR  NOTEHOLDERS  MAY BE AMENDED OR ABROGATED, THE AMOUNT OF
 NOTES OR BONDS THE HOLDERS OF WHICH MUST CONSENT THERETO, AND THE MANNER
 IN WHICH SUCH CONSENT MAY BE GIVEN; AND
  (G) ANY OTHER MATTERS, OF LIKE OR DIFFERENT CHARACTER,  WHICH  IN  ANY
 WAY AFFECT THE SECURITY OR PROTECTION OF THE NOTES OR BONDS.
  8.  IT  IS  THE INTENTION HEREOF THAT ANY PLEDGE MADE BY THE AUTHORITY
 SHALL BE VALID AND BINDING FROM THE TIME WHEN THE PLEDGE IS  MADE,  THAT
 THE  MONEYS  SO  PLEDGED  AND THEREAFTER RECEIVED BY THE AUTHORITY SHALL
 IMMEDIATELY BE SUBJECT TO THE LIEN OF SUCH PLEDGE WITHOUT  ANY  PHYSICAL
 DELIVERY  THEREOF  OR  FURTHER ACT, AND THAT THE LIEN OF ANY SUCH PLEDGE
 SHALL BE VALID AND BINDING AS AGAINST ALL PARTIES HAVING CLAIMS  OF  ANY
 KIND  IN  TORT, CONTRACT OR OTHERWISE AGAINST THE AUTHORITY IRRESPECTIVE
 OF WHETHER SUCH PARTIES HAVE NOTICE THEREOF. NEITHER THE RESOLUTION  NOR
 ANY OTHER INSTRUMENT BY WHICH A PLEDGE IS CREATED NEED BE RECORDED.
  9.  NEITHER  THE MEMBERS OF THE AUTHORITY NOR ANY PERSON EXECUTING THE
 BONDS OR NOTES SHALL BE LIABLE PERSONALLY ON THE BONDS OR  NOTES  OR  BE
 SUBJECT  TO  ANY  PERSONAL  LIABILITY OR ACCOUNTABILITY BY REASON OF THE
 ISSUANCE THEREOF.
  10. SUBJECT TO SUCH AGREEMENTS WITH BONDHOLDERS OR NOTEHOLDERS AS  MAY
 THEN  EXIST,  THE  AUTHORITY SHALL HAVE POWER OUT OF ANY FUNDS AVAILABLE
 THEREFOR TO PURCHASE BONDS OR NOTES AT A PRICE NOT EXCEEDING (A) IF  THE
 NOTES OR BONDS ARE THEN REDEEMABLE, THE REDEMPTION PRICE THEN APPLICABLE
 PLUS  ACCRUED INTEREST TO THE NEXT INTEREST PAYMENT DATE THEREON, OR (B)
 IF THE NOTES OR BONDS ARE NOT  THEN  REDEEMABLE,  THE  REDEMPTION  PRICE
 APPLICABLE ON THE FIRST DATE AFTER SUCH PURCHASE UPON WHICH THE NOTES OR
 A. 10454  13
 
 BONDS  BECOME  SUBJECT TO REDEMPTION PLUS ACCRUED INTEREST TO SAID DATE.
 BONDS AND NOTES SO PURCHASED SHALL THEREUPON BE CANCELLED.
  11.  THE STATE DOES HEREBY PLEDGE TO AND AGREE WITH THE HOLDERS OF ANY
 BONDS OR NOTES THAT THE STATE WILL NOT LIMIT OR  ALTER  THE  RIGHTS  AND
 POWERS VESTED IN THE AUTHORITY BY THIS TITLE TO FULFILL THE TERMS OF ANY
 CONTRACT  MADE  BY THE AUTHORITY WITH SUCH HOLDERS, OR IN ANY WAY IMPAIR
 THE RIGHTS AND REMEDIES OF SUCH HOLDERS  UNTIL  SUCH  BONDS  AND  NOTES,
 TOGETHER WITH THE INTEREST THEREON, WITH INTEREST ON ANY UNPAID INSTALL-
 MENTS  OF  INTEREST,  AND  ALL COSTS AND EXPENSES IN CONNECTION WITH ANY
 ACTION OR PROCEEDING BY OR ON BEHALF OF SUCH HOLDERS, ARE FULLY MET  AND
 DISCHARGED.  THE  AUTHORITY  IS  AUTHORIZED  TO  INCLUDE THIS PLEDGE AND
 AGREEMENT OF THE STATE, INSOFAR AS IT REFERS TO HOLDERS OF ANY BONDS  OR
 NOTES, IN ANY CONTRACT WITH SUCH HOLDERS.
  §  1761. RESERVE FUNDS AND APPROPRIATIONS. 1. THE AUTHORITY MAY CREATE
 AND ESTABLISH ONE OR MORE RESERVE FUNDS TO  BE  KNOWN  AS  DEBT  SERVICE
 RESERVE  FUNDS AND MAY PAY INTO SUCH RESERVE FUNDS (A) ANY MONEYS APPRO-
 PRIATED AND MADE AVAILABLE BY THE STATE FOR THE PURPOSES OF SUCH  FUNDS,
 (B)  ANY  PROCEEDS  OF SALE OF BONDS AND NOTES TO THE EXTENT PROVIDED IN
 THE RESOLUTION OF THE AUTHORITY AUTHORIZING THE  ISSUANCE  THEREOF,  (C)
 ANY  MONEYS  DIRECTED  TO BE TRANSFERRED BY THE AUTHORITY TO SUCH FUNDS,
 AND (D) ANY OTHER MONEYS WHICH MAY BE MADE AVAILABLE  TO  THE  AUTHORITY
 FOR  THE  PURPOSES  OF  SUCH FUNDS FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE OR SOURCES. THE
 MONEYS HELD IN OR CREDITED TO ANY DEBT SERVICE RESERVE FUND  ESTABLISHED
 UNDER  THIS  SUBDIVISION,  EXCEPT AS HEREINAFTER PROVIDED, SHALL BE USED
 SOLELY FOR THE PAYMENT OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  OF  BONDS  OF  THE  AUTHORITY
 SECURED  BY  SUCH RESERVE FUND, AS THE SAME MATURE, REQUIRED PAYMENTS TO
 ANY SINKING FUND ESTABLISHED FOR THE AMORTIZATION OF SUCH BONDS (HEREIN-
 AFTER REFERRED TO AS "SINKING FUND PAYMENTS"), THE PURCHASE  OR  REDEMP-
 TION  OF  SUCH  BONDS  OF THE AUTHORITY, THE PAYMENT OF INTEREST ON SUCH
 BONDS OF THE AUTHORITY OR THE PAYMENT OF ANY REDEMPTION PREMIUM REQUIRED
 TO BE PAID WHEN SUCH BONDS ARE REDEEMED  PRIOR  TO  MATURITY;  PROVIDED,
 HOWEVER,  THAT  MONEYS IN ANY SUCH FUND SHALL NOT BE WITHDRAWN THEREFROM
 AT ANY TIME IN SUCH AMOUNT AS WOULD REDUCE THE AMOUNT OF  SUCH  FUND  TO
 LESS  THAN  THE  MAXIMUM  AMOUNT  OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST MATURING AND
 BECOMING DUE IN ANY SUCCEEDING CALENDAR YEAR ON THE BONDS OF THE AUTHOR-
 ITY THEN OUTSTANDING AND SECURED BY SUCH RESERVE FUND,  EXCEPT  FOR  THE
 PURPOSE  OF  PAYING PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST ON THE BONDS OF THE AUTHORITY
 SECURED BY SUCH RESERVE FUND MATURING AND BECOMING DUE AND SINKING  FUND
 PAYMENTS  FOR THE PAYMENT OF WHICH OTHER MONEYS OF THE AUTHORITY ARE NOT
 AVAILABLE. ANY INCOME OR INTEREST EARNED BY, OR INCREMENT TO,  ANY  SUCH
 DEBT  SERVICE  RESERVE  FUND DUE TO THE INVESTMENT THEREOF MAY BE TRANS-
 FERRED TO ANY OTHER FUND OR ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHORITY TO  THE  EXTENT  IT
 DOES  NOT  REDUCE THE AMOUNT OF SUCH DEBT SERVICE RESERVE FUND BELOW THE
 MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST MATURING AND  BECOMING  DUE  IN
 ANY  SUCCEEDING  CALENDAR  YEAR  ON  ALL  BONDS  OF  THE  AUTHORITY THEN
 OUTSTANDING AND SECURED BY SUCH RESERVE FUND.  IN COMPUTING  THE  AMOUNT
 OF ANY DEBT SERVICE RESERVE FUND FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, SECU-
 RITIES IN WHICH ALL OR A PORTION OF SUCH RESERVE FUND ARE INVESTED SHALL
 BE VALUED AT PAR OR, IF PURCHASED AT LESS THAN PAR, AT THEIR COST TO THE
 AUTHORITY.
  2.  THE  AUTHORITY  SHALL  NOT  ISSUE BONDS AT ANY TIME IF THE MAXIMUM
 AMOUNT OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST MATURING AND BECOMING DUE IN A SUCCEED-
 ING CALENDAR YEAR ON THE BONDS OUTSTANDING AND THEN  TO  BE  ISSUED  AND
 SECURED  BY  A  DEBT SERVICE RESERVE FUND WILL EXCEED THE AMOUNT OF SUCH
 RESERVE FUND AT THE TIME OF ISSUANCE, UNLESS THE AUTHORITY, AT THE  TIME
 OF  ISSUANCE  OF SUCH BONDS, SHALL DEPOSIT IN SUCH RESERVE FUND FROM THE
 A. 10454  14
 
 PROCEEDS OF THE BONDS SO TO BE ISSUED, OR  OTHERWISE,  AN  AMOUNT  WHICH
 TOGETHER  WITH  THE  AMOUNT  THEN IN SUCH RESERVE FUND, WILL BE NOT LESS
 THAN THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST MATURING AND  BECOMING
 DUE  IN  ANY SUCCEEDING CALENDAR YEAR ON THE BONDS THEN TO BE ISSUED AND
 ON ALL OTHER BONDS OF THE AUTHORITY THEN OUTSTANDING AND SECURED BY SUCH
 RESERVE FUND.
  3. TO ASSURE THE CONTINUED OPERATION AND SOLVENCY OF THE AUTHORITY FOR
 THE CARRYING OUT OF THE PUBLIC PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE PROVISION IS  MADE
 IN  SUBDIVISION  ONE  OF  THIS SECTION FOR THE ACCUMULATION IN EACH DEBT
 SERVICE RESERVE FUND OF AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF PRINCI-
 PAL AND INTEREST MATURING AND BECOMING DUE IN  ANY  SUCCEEDING  CALENDAR
 YEAR  ON ALL BONDS OF THE AUTHORITY THEN OUTSTANDING AND SECURED BY SUCH
 RESERVE FUND.  IN ORDER FURTHER TO ASSURE THE MAINTENANCE OF  SUCH  DEBT
 SERVICE  RESERVE  FUNDS, THERE SHALL BE ANNUALLY APPORTIONED AND PAID TO
 THE AUTHORITY FOR DEPOSIT IN EACH DEBT SERVICE RESERVE FUND SUCH SUM, IF
 ANY, AS SHALL BE CERTIFIED BY THE CHAIR OF THE AUTHORITY TO THE GOVERNOR
 AND STATE DIRECTOR OF THE BUDGET AS NECESSARY TO  RESTORE  SUCH  RESERVE
 FUND  TO AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST
 MATURING AND BECOMING DUE IN ANY SUCCEEDING CALENDAR YEAR ON  THE  BONDS
 OF  THE AUTHORITY THEN OUTSTANDING AND SECURED BY SUCH RESERVE FUND. THE
 CHAIR OF THE AUTHORITY SHALL ANNUALLY, ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER FIRST, MAKE
 AND DELIVER TO THE GOVERNOR AND STATE DIRECTOR OF THE BUDGET  A  CERTIF-
 ICATE  STATING  THE  SUM,  IF  ANY,  REQUIRED  TO RESTORE EACH SUCH DEBT
 SERVICE RESERVE FUND TO THE AMOUNT AFORESAID, AND THE  SUM  OR  SUMS  SO
 CERTIFIED, IF ANY, SHALL BE APPORTIONED AND PAID TO THE AUTHORITY DURING
 THE  THEN  CURRENT  STATE  FISCAL  YEAR.  THE  PRINCIPAL AMOUNT OF BONDS
 SECURED BY A DEBT SERVICE RESERVE FUND OR FUNDS TO WHICH STATE FUNDS ARE
 APPORTIONABLE PURSUANT TO THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL BE LIMITED TO THE TOTAL
 AMOUNT OF BONDS AND NOTES OUTSTANDING ON  THE  EFFECTIVE  DATE  OF  THIS
 TITLE,  PLUS  THE  TOTAL  AMOUNT OF BONDS AND NOTES CONTRACTED AFTER THE
 EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS TITLE TO FINANCE  PROJECTS  IN  PROGRESS  ON  THE
 EFFECTIVE  DATE OF THIS TITLE AS DETERMINED BY THE NEW YORK STATE PUBLIC
 AUTHORITIES CONTROL BOARD CREATED PURSUANT  TO  SECTION  FIFTY  OF  THIS
 CHAPTER  WHOSE  AFFIRMATIVE  DETERMINATION SHALL BE CONCLUSIVE AS TO ALL
 MATTERS OF LAW AND FACT SOLELY  FOR  THE  PURPOSES  OF  THE  LIMITATIONS
 CONTAINED IN THIS SUBDIVISION, BUT IN NO EVENT SHALL THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF
 BONDS  SO  SECURED  BY  SUCH A DEBT SERVICE RESERVE FUND OR FUNDS EXCEED
 NINE MILLION SIX HUNDRED SIXTY THOUSAND DOLLARS, EXCLUDING BONDS  ISSUED
 TO  REFUND  SUCH  OUTSTANDING BONDS UNTIL THE DATE OF REDEMPTION OF SUCH
 OUTSTANDING BONDS. AS OUTSTANDING BONDS SO SECURED ARE PAID, THE  AMOUNT
 SO  SECURED  SHALL  BE  REDUCED  ACCORDINGLY  BUT THE REDEMPTION OF SUCH
 OUTSTANDING BONDS FROM THE PROCEEDS OF REFUNDING BONDS SHALL NOT  REDUCE
 THE AMOUNT SO SECURED.
  4. ALL AMOUNTS PAID OVER TO THE AUTHORITY BY THE STATE PURSUANT TO THE
 PROVISIONS  OF  THIS  SECTION  SHALL  CONSTITUTE AND BE ACCOUNTED FOR AS
 ADVANCES BY THE STATE TO THE AUTHORITY AND, SUBJECT ONLY TO  THE  RIGHTS
 OF  THE  HOLDERS  OF  ANY BONDS OR NOTES OF THE AUTHORITY THERETOFORE OR
 THEREAFTER ISSUED, SHALL BE REPAID TO THE STATE FROM ALL AVAILABLE OPER-
 ATING REVENUES OF THE AUTHORITY IN EXCESS OF DEBT SERVICE  RESERVE  FUND
 REQUIREMENTS AND OPERATING EXPENSES.
  5.  AS  USED  IN THIS SECTION, (A) THE TERM "OPERATING EXPENSES" SHALL
 MEAN ORDINARY EXPENDITURES  FOR  OPERATION  AND  ADMINISTRATION  OF  THE
 AUTHORITY,  INCLUDING  MAINTENANCE,  REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF AUTHORITY
 PROPERTY; AND (B) THE TERM "AVAILABLE OPERATING REVENUES" SHALL MEAN ALL
 AMOUNTS RECEIVED ON ACCOUNT OF RENTALS AND FEES CHARGED BY THE  AUTHORI-
 TY,  IF  ANY,  AND  INCOME  OR  INTEREST EARNED OR ADDED TO FUNDS OF THE
 A. 10454  15
 
 AUTHORITY DUE TO THE INVESTMENT THEREOF,  AND  NOT  REQUIRED  UNDER  THE
 TERMS  OR  PROVISIONS  OF  ANY COVENANT OR AGREEMENT WITH HOLDERS OF ANY
 BONDS OR NOTES OF THE AUTHORITY TO BE APPLIED TO ANY PURPOSES OTHER THAN
 PAYMENT OF OPERATING EXPENSES OF THE AUTHORITY.
  §  1762.  EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION OF BONDS AND NOTES. THE STATE COVEN-
 ANTS WITH THE PURCHASERS AND WITH ALL SUBSEQUENT HOLDERS AND TRANSFEREES
 OF BONDS AND NOTES, IN CONSIDERATION OF THE ACCEPTANCE  OF  AND  PAYMENT
 FOR  THE BONDS AND NOTES, THAT THE BONDS AND NOTES AND THE INCOME THERE-
 FROM, AND ALL MONEYS, FUNDS AND REVENUES PLEDGED TO PAY  OR  SECURE  THE
 PAYMENT  OF  SUCH  BONDS AND NOTES SHALL AT ALL TIMES BE FREE FROM TAXA-
 TION, EXCEPT FOR ESTATE AND GIFT TAXES AND TAXES ON TRANSFERS.
  § 1763. BONDS AND NOTES LEGAL INVESTMENTS FOR FIDUCIARIES.  THE  BONDS
 AND  NOTES  ARE  HEREBY MADE SECURITIES IN WHICH ALL PUBLIC OFFICERS AND
 BODIES OF THE STATE AND ALL MUNICIPALITIES AND  MUNICIPAL  SUBDIVISIONS,
 ALL  INSURANCE  COMPANIES AND ASSOCIATIONS AND OTHER PERSONS CARRYING ON
 AN INSURANCE BUSINESS, ALL  BANKS,  BANKERS,  TRUST  COMPANIES,  SAVINGS
 BANKS, SAVINGS ASSOCIATIONS, INCLUDING SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONS AND
 BUILDING  AND  LOAN ASSOCIATIONS, INVESTMENT COMPANIES AND OTHER PERSONS
 CARRYING ON A BANKING BUSINESS, ALL  ADMINISTRATORS,  GUARDIANS,  EXECU-
 TORS,  TRUSTEES  AND OTHER FIDUCIARIES, AND ALL OTHER PERSONS WHATSOEVER
 WHO ARE NOW OR WHO MAY HEREAFTER BE AUTHORIZED TO  INVEST  IN  BONDS  OR
 OTHER  OBLIGATIONS  OF  THE STATE, MAY PROPERLY AND LEGALLY INVEST FUNDS
 INCLUDING CAPITAL IN THEIR CONTROL OR BELONGING TO THEM. NOTWITHSTANDING
 ANY OTHER PROVISIONS OF LAW, THE BONDS AND NOTES OF  THE  AUTHORITY  ARE
 ALSO  HEREBY  MADE  SECURITIES  WHICH  MAY  BE DEPOSITED WITH AND MAY BE
 RECEIVED BY ALL PUBLIC OFFICERS AND BODIES OF THIS STATE AND ALL MUNICI-
 PALITIES AND MUNICIPAL SUBDIVISIONS FOR ANY PURPOSE FOR WHICH THE DEPOS-
 IT OF BONDS OR OTHER OBLIGATIONS OF THE STATE IS NOW OR MAY HEREAFTER BE
 AUTHORIZED.
  § 1764. RIGHT OF STATE TO REQUIRE REDEMPTION OF BONDS. NOTWITHSTANDING
 AND IN ADDITION TO ANY PROVISIONS FOR THE REDEMPTION OF BONDS WHICH  MAY
 BE  CONTAINED  IN  ANY CONTRACT WITH THE HOLDERS OF THE BONDS, THE STATE
 MAY, UPON FURNISHING SUFFICIENT FUNDS THEREFOR, REQUIRE THE AUTHORITY TO
 REDEEM, PRIOR TO MATURITY, AS A WHOLE, ANY ISSUE OF BONDS ON ANY  INTER-
 EST  PAYMENT DATE NOT LESS THAN TWENTY YEARS AFTER THE DATE OF THE BONDS
 OF SUCH ISSUE AT ONE HUNDRED  FIVE  PERCENT  OF  THEIR  FACE  VALUE  AND
 ACCRUED  INTEREST  OR AT SUCH LESSER REDEMPTION PRICE AS MAY BE PROVIDED
 IN THE BONDS IN CASE OF THE REDEMPTION THEREOF AS A WHOLE ON THE REDEMP-
 TION DATE. NOTICE OF SUCH REDEMPTION SHALL BE PUBLISHED IN AT LEAST  TWO
 NEWSPAPERS PUBLISHED AND CIRCULATING RESPECTIVELY IN THE CITIES OF ALBA-
 NY  AND  NEW  YORK  AT LEAST TWICE, THE FIRST PUBLICATION TO BE AT LEAST
 THIRTY DAYS BEFORE THE DATE OF REDEMPTION.
  § 1765. RIGHTS AND REMEDIES OF BONDHOLDERS AND NOTEHOLDERS. THE  HOLD-
 ERS  OF  BONDS  AND  NOTES SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING RIGHTS AND REMEDIES,
 SUBJECT TO THE TERMS OF THE RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING SUCH BONDS AND  NOTES
 OR  ANY  TRUST  INDENTURE,  SECURED  LOAN  AGREEMENT OR OTHER INSTRUMENT
 RELATED THERETO:
  1. IN THE EVENT THAT THE AUTHORITY SHALL DEFAULT  IN  THE  PAYMENT  OF
 PRINCIPAL  OF  OR INTEREST ON ANY ISSUE OF BONDS OR NOTES AFTER THE SAME
 SHALL BECOME DUE, WHETHER AT MATURITY OR UPON CALL FOR  REDEMPTION,  AND
 SUCH DEFAULT SHALL CONTINUE FOR A PERIOD OF THIRTY DAYS, OR IN THE EVENT
 THAT THE AUTHORITY SHALL FAIL OR REFUSE TO COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS OF
 THIS  TITLE,  OR  SHALL DEFAULT IN ANY CONTRACT MADE WITH THE HOLDERS OF
 ANY ISSUE OF BONDS OR NOTES, THE HOLDERS OF TWENTY-FIVE  PER  CENTUM  IN
 AGGREGATE  PRINCIPAL  AMOUNT  OF  THE  BONDS OR NOTES OF SUCH ISSUE THEN
 OUTSTANDING, BY INSTRUMENT OR INSTRUMENTS FILED IN  THE  OFFICE  OF  THE
 A. 10454  16
 
 CLERK  IN  THE COUNTY OF ALBANY AND APPROVED OR ACKNOWLEDGED IN THE SAME
 MANNER AS A DEED TO BE RECORDED, MAY APPOINT A TRUSTEE TO REPRESENT  THE
 HOLDERS OF SUCH BONDS OR NOTES FOR THE PURPOSES HEREIN PROVIDED.
  2.  SUCH TRUSTEE MAY, AND UPON WRITTEN REQUEST OF THE HOLDERS OF TWEN-
 TY-FIVE PER CENTUM IN PRINCIPAL AMOUNT  OF  SUCH  BONDS  OR  NOTES  THEN
 OUTSTANDING SHALL, IN SUCH TRUSTEE'S OR ITS OWN NAME:
  (A)  BY  SUIT, ACTION OR SPECIAL PROCEEDING, ENFORCE ALL RIGHTS OF THE
 BONDHOLDERS OR NOTEHOLDERS, INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO REQUIRE THE AUTHORITY
 TO COLLECT FEES, RENTALS AND CHARGES ADEQUATE TO CARRY  OUT  ANY  AGREE-
 MENTS  WITH THE HOLDERS OF SUCH BONDS OR NOTES AND TO PERFORM ITS DUTIES
 UNDER THIS TITLE;
  (B) BRING SUIT UPON SUCH BONDS OR NOTES;
  (C) BY ACTION OR SUIT IN EQUITY, REQUIRE THE AUTHORITY TO  ACCOUNT  AS
 IF IT WERE THE TRUSTEE OF AN EXPRESS TRUST FOR THE HOLDERS OF SUCH BONDS
 OR NOTES;
  (D) BY ACTION OR SUIT IN EQUITY, ENJOIN ANY ACT OR THINGS WHICH MAY BE
 UNLAWFUL  OR  IN VIOLATION OF THE RIGHTS OF THE HOLDERS OF SUCH BONDS OR
 NOTES; AND
  (E) DECLARE ALL SUCH BONDS OR  NOTES  DUE  AND  PAYABLE,  AND  IF  ALL
 DEFAULTS  SHALL  BE  MADE  GOOD  THEN WITH THE CONSENT OF THE HOLDERS OF
 TWENTY-FIVE PER CENTUM OF THE PRINCIPAL AMOUNT OF SUCH  BONDS  OR  NOTES
 THEN OUTSTANDING, TO ANNUL SUCH DECLARATION AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.
  3. SUCH TRUSTEE, WHETHER OR NOT THE ISSUANCE OF BONDS OR NOTES REPRES-
 ENTED  BY SUCH TRUSTEE HAD BEEN DECLARED DUE AND PAYABLE, SHALL BE ENTI-
 TLED AS OF RIGHT TO THE APPOINTMENT OF A RECEIVER OF ANY PROPERTY OF THE
 AUTHORITY, THE FEES, RENTALS, CHARGES OR OTHER  REVENUES  OF  WHICH  ARE
 PLEDGED  FOR  THE  SECURITY OF THE BONDS OR NOTES OF SUCH ISSUE AND SUCH
 RECEIVER MAY ENTER AND TAKE POSSESSION OF SUCH PROPERTY, OR ANY PART  OR
 PARTS  THEREOF  AND  OPERATE AND MAINTAIN THE SAME AND RECEIVE ALL FEES,
 CHARGES, RENTALS AND OTHER REVENUES  THEREAFTER  ARISING  THEREFROM  AND
 EXERCISE SUCH OTHER POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY AS THE COURT MAY DEEM ADVIS-
 ABLE  AND  PERFORM  THE  PUBLIC  DUTIES AND CARRY OUT THE AGREEMENTS AND
 OBLIGATIONS OF THE AUTHORITY UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE  COURT.  IN  ANY
 SUIT,  ACTION  OR  PROCEEDING  BY THE TRUSTEE THE FEES, COUNSEL FEES AND
 EXPENSES OF THE TRUSTEE AND OF THE RECEIVER, IF  ANY,  SHALL  CONSTITUTE
 TAXABLE  DISBURSEMENTS  AND  ALL  COSTS AND DISBURSEMENTS ALLOWED BY THE
 COURT SHALL BE A FIRST CHARGE ON ANY FEES, CHARGES,  RENTALS  AND  OTHER
 REVENUES DERIVED FROM SUCH PROPERTIES.
  4.  SUCH  TRUSTEE  SHALL IN ADDITION TO THE FOREGOING HAVE AND POSSESS
 ALL OF THE POWERS NECESSARY OR APPROPRIATE FOR THE EXERCISE OF ANY FUNC-
 TIONS SPECIFICALLY SET FORTH HEREIN OR INCIDENT TO THE GENERAL REPRESEN-
 TATION OF BONDHOLDERS OR NOTEHOLDERS IN THE ENFORCEMENT  AND  PROTECTION
 OF THEIR RIGHTS.
  5.  THE  SUPREME  COURT SHALL HAVE JURISDICTION OF ANY SUIT, ACTION OR
 PROCEEDING BY THE TRUSTEE ON BEHALF OF SUCH BONDHOLDERS OR  NOTEHOLDERS.
 THE  VENUE  OF  ANY SUCH SUIT, ACTION OR PROCEEDING SHALL BE LAID IN THE
 COUNTY OF ALBANY.
  6. BEFORE DECLARING THE PRINCIPAL OF BONDS OR NOTES DUE  AND  PAYABLE,
 THE  TRUSTEE  SHALL  FIRST  GIVE  THIRTY  DAYS' NOTICE IN WRITING TO THE
 GOVERNOR, TO THE AUTHORITY, TO  THE  COMPTROLLER  AND  TO  THE  ATTORNEY
 GENERAL OF THE STATE.
  § 1766. STATE NOT LIABLE ON BONDS AND NOTES. THE BONDS AND NOTES SHALL
 NOT  BE  A  DEBT  OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK NOR SHALL THE STATE BE LIABLE
 THEREON AND SUCH BONDS AND NOTES SHALL CONTAIN ON  THE  FACE  THEREOF  A
 STATEMENT TO THAT EFFECT.
 A. 10454  17
 
  §  4.  The  tax law is amended by adding a new article 29-E to read as
 follows:
  ARTICLE 29-E
  FOR-HIRE VEHICLE IMPROVEMENT SURCHARGE
 SECTION 1299-AA. DEFINITIONS.
  1299-BB. IMPOSITION OF TAX.
  1299-CC. LIABILITY FOR SURCHARGE.
  1299-DD. RETURNS AND PAYMENT OF SURCHARGE.
  1299-EE. RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
  1299-FF. DEPOSIT AND DISPOSITION OF REVENUE.
  § 1299-AA. DEFINITIONS. AS USED OR REFERRED TO IN THIS ARTICLE, UNLESS
 A DIFFERENT MEANING CLEARLY APPEARS FROM THE CONTEXT:
  (A)  "PERSON"  MEANS  AN  INDIVIDUAL,  PARTNERSHIP,  LIMITED LIABILITY
 COMPANY, SOCIETY, ASSOCIATION, JOINT STOCK COMPANY, CORPORATION, ESTATE,
 RECEIVER, TRUSTEE, ASSIGNEE, REFEREE OR ANY OTHER  PERSON  ACTING  IN  A
 FIDUCIARY  OR  REPRESENTATIVE  CAPACITY, WHETHER APPOINTED BY A COURT OR
 OTHERWISE, ANY COMBINATION OF INDIVIDUALS AND ANY OTHER FORM OF UNINCOR-
 PORATED ENTERPRISE OWNED OR CONDUCTED BY TWO OR MORE PERSONS.
  (B)  "AUTHORITY" MEANS THE  GREEN  TRANSITION  AUTHORITY  ESTABLISHED
 PURSUANT  TO  SECTION SEVENTEEN HUNDRED FIFTY-ONE OF THE PUBLIC AUTHORI-
 TIES LAW.
  (C) "FOR-HIRE VEHICLE" MEANS ANY TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY  VEHI-
 CLE  ("TNC VEHICLE") AS DEFINED IN SECTION SIXTEEN HUNDRED NINETY-ONE OF
 THE VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC LAW AND  ANY  FOR-HIRE  VEHICLE  AS  DEFINED  IN
 SECTION 19-502 OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK.
  (D)  "FOR-HIRE TRANSPORTATION TRIP" MEANS TRANSPORTATION PROVIDED IN A
 FOR-HIRE VEHICLE AS DEFINED IN SUBDIVISION  (C)  OF  THIS  SECTION,  FOR
 WHICH A CHARGE IS MADE.
  (E)  "HIGH-VOLUME  FOR-HIRE  SERVICE"  SHALL  HAVE THE SAME MEANING AS
 DEFINED IN SECTION 19-502 OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF THE CITY OF  NEW
 YORK.
  §  1299-BB.  IMPOSITION  OF TAX.  (A) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER TAX OR
 ASSESSMENT IMPOSED BY THIS CHAPTER OR OTHER LAW, THERE IS HEREBY IMPOSED
 A SURCHARGE  OF  ONE  DOLLAR  FOR  EACH  FOR-HIRE  TRANSPORTATION  TRIP
 CONDUCTED  IN  A TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY VEHICLE OR BY A HIGH-VO-
 LUME FOR-HIRE SERVICE.
  (B) RECEIPTS SUBJECT TO TAX UNDER PARAGRAPH TEN OF SUBDIVISION (C)  OF
 SECTION  ELEVEN  HUNDRED FIVE OF THIS CHAPTER SHALL BE DEEMED TO EXCLUDE
 ANY SURCHARGE IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE.
  § 1299-CC. LIABILITY FOR SURCHARGE. (A) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY  PROVISION
 OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY, ANY PERSON WHO DISPATCHES A MOTOR VEHICLE BY ANY
 MEANS  THAT  PROVIDES  TRANSPORTATION  THAT  IS  SUBJECT  TO A SURCHARGE
 IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE SHALL BE LIABLE FOR  THE  SURCHARGE  IMPOSED  BY
 THIS ARTICLE.
  (B) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY LAW TO THE CONTRARY: (1) THE SURCHARGE IMPOSED
 BY THIS ARTICLE SHALL BE PASSED ALONG TO PASSENGERS AND SEPARATELY STAT-
 ED ON ANY RECEIPT THAT IS PROVIDED TO SUCH PASSENGERS. THE PASSING ALONG
 OF  SUCH SURCHARGE SHALL NOT BE CONSTRUED BY ANY COURT OR ADMINISTRATIVE
 BODY AS THE IMPOSITION OF THE SURCHARGE ON THE  PERSON  OR  ENTITY  THAT
 PAYS FOR THE FOR-HIRE TRANSPORTATION TRIP. ALL REGULATORY AGENCIES SHALL
 ADJUST  ANY  FARES  THAT  ARE AUTHORIZED BY SUCH AGENCIES TO INCLUDE THE
 SURCHARGE IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE AND SHALL REQUIRE THAT  ANY  METER  OR
 OTHER  INSTRUMENT  USED IN ANY FOR-HIRE VEHICLE REGULATED BY SUCH AGENCY
 TO CALCULATE FARES BE ADJUSTED TO INCLUDE THE SURCHARGE.
  (2) NEITHER THE FAILURE OF A REGULATORY AGENCY TO ADJUST FARES NOR THE
 FAILURE TO ADJUST A METER OR OTHER INSTRUMENT USED IN A FOR-HIRE VEHICLE
 A. 10454  18
 
 TO CALCULATE FARES SHALL RELIEVE ANY PERSON  LIABLE  FOR  THE  SURCHARGE
 IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE FROM THE OBLIGATION TO PAY SUCH SURCHARGE.
  §  1299-DD.  RETURNS AND PAYMENT OF SURCHARGE. (A) EVERY PERSON LIABLE
 FOR THE SURCHARGE IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE SHALL FILE A RETURN  WITH  THE
 COMMISSIONER  ON  A  MONTHLY BASIS. EACH RETURN SHALL SHOW THE NUMBER OF
 FOR-HIRE TRANSPORTATION TRIPS SUBJECT TO THE SURCHARGE IMPOSED  BY  THIS
 ARTICLE  IN  THE  MONTH  FOR  WHICH THE RETURN IS FILED, ALONG WITH SUCH
 OTHER INFORMATION AS THE COMMISSIONER MAY REQUIRE. THE RETURNS  REQUIRED
 BY  THIS  SECTION SHALL BE FILED WITHIN TWENTY DAYS AFTER THE END OF THE
 MONTH COVERED THEREBY. IF THE COMMISSIONER DEEMS IT NECESSARY TO  ENSURE
 THE  PAYMENT  OF THE SURCHARGE IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE, THE COMMISSIONER
 MAY REQUIRE RETURNS TO BE MADE FOR SHORTER PERIODS  THAN  PRESCRIBED  BY
 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION, AND UPON SUCH DATES AS MAY BE SPECIFIED.
 THE  FORM  OF  RETURNS SHALL BE PRESCRIBED BY THE COMMISSIONER AND SHALL
 CONTAIN SUCH INFORMATION AS THE COMMISSIONER MAY DEEM NECESSARY FOR  THE
 PROPER ADMINISTRATION OF THIS ARTICLE. THE COMMISSIONER MAY REQUIRE THAT
 RETURNS BE FILED ELECTRONICALLY.
  (B)  EVERY  PERSON  LIABLE  FOR  THE SURCHARGE IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE
 SHALL, AT THE TIME OF FILING SUCH RETURN, PAY TO  THE  COMMISSIONER  THE
 TOTAL AMOUNT OF ALL SURCHARGES DUE UNDER THIS ARTICLE. SUCH AMOUNT SHALL
 BE  DUE  AND  PAYABLE ON THE DATE SPECIFIED FOR THE FILING OF THE RETURN
 FOR SUCH PERIOD, WITHOUT REGARD TO WHETHER A RETURN IS FILED, OR WHETHER
 THE RETURN THAT IS FILED CORRECTLY SHOWS THE CORRECT NUMBER OF  FOR-HIRE
 TRIPS THAT ARE SUBJECT TO THE SURCHARGE, OR THE CORRECT SURCHARGE AMOUNT
 DUE  THEREON.  THE  COMMISSIONER  MAY REQUIRE THAT THE SURCHARGE BE PAID
 ELECTRONICALLY.
  (C) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER PENALTY OR INTEREST  PROVIDED  FOR  UNDER
 THIS  ARTICLE  OR OTHER LAW, AND UNLESS IT IS SHOWN THAT SUCH FAILURE IS
 DUE TO REASONABLE CAUSE AND NOT  DUE  TO  WILLFUL  NEGLECT,  ANY  PERSON
 LIABLE  FOR THE SURCHARGE IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE THAT FAILS TO PAY SUCH
 SURCHARGE WHEN DUE SHALL BE LIABLE FOR A PENALTY IN AN AMOUNT  EQUAL  TO
 TWO HUNDRED PERCENT OF THE TOTAL SURCHARGE AMOUNT THAT IS DUE.
  §  1299-EE. RECORDS TO BE KEPT.  EVERY PERSON LIABLE FOR THE SURCHARGE
 IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE SHALL KEEP, AND SHALL MAKE AVAILABLE FOR  REVIEW
 UPON DEMAND BY THE COMMISSIONER:
  (A)  RECORDS  OF  EVERY  TRIP  PROVIDED OR ARRANGED BY SUCH PERSON, OR
 PROVIDED THROUGH THE USE OF A FOR-HIRE VEHICLE OWNED OR LEASED  BY  SUCH
 PERSON,  INCLUDING  ALL  AMOUNTS  PAID, CHARGED, OR DUE THEREON, IN SUCH
 FORM AS THE COMMISSIONER MAY REQUIRE;
  (B) TRUE AND COMPLETE COPIES OF ANY RECORDS REQUIRED TO BE KEPT BY ANY
 APPLICABLE REGULATORY DEPARTMENT OR AGENCY; AND
  (C) SUCH OTHER RECORDS AND INFORMATION AS THE COMMISSIONER MAY REQUIRE
 TO PERFORM THEIR DUTIES UNDER THIS ARTICLE.
  § 1299-FF. DEPOSIT AND DISPOSITION  OF  REVENUE.  (A)  ANY  SURCHARGE,
 INTEREST,  AND PENALTIES COLLECTED OR RECEIVED BY THE COMMISSIONER SHALL
 BE DEPOSITED DAILY WITH SUCH RESPONSIBLE BANKS, BANKING HOUSES, OR TRUST
 COMPANIES, AS MAY BE DESIGNATED BY THE COMPTROLLER, TO THE CREDIT OF THE
 COMPTROLLER IN TRUST FOR THE GREEN TRANSITION AUTHORITY. AN ACCOUNT  MAY
 BE  ESTABLISHED IN ONE OR MORE OF SUCH DEPOSITORIES. SUCH DEPOSITS SHALL
 BE KEPT SEPARATE AND APART FROM ALL OTHER MONEY IN THE POSSESSION OF THE
 COMPTROLLER. THE COMPTROLLER SHALL REQUIRE ADEQUATE  SECURITY  FROM  ALL
 SUCH DEPOSITORIES. OF THE TOTAL REVENUE COLLECTED OR RECEIVED UNDER THIS
 ARTICLE,  THE  COMPTROLLER  SHALL RETAIN SUCH AMOUNT AS THE COMMISSIONER
 MAY DETERMINE TO BE  NECESSARY  FOR  REFUNDS  UNDER  THIS  ARTICLE.  THE
 COMMISSIONER  IS  AUTHORIZED AND DIRECTED TO DEDUCT FROM THE AMOUNTS THE
 DEPARTMENT RECEIVES UNDER THIS ARTICLE, BEFORE DEPOSIT  INTO  THE  TRUST
 A. 10454  19
 
 ACCOUNTS DESIGNATED BY THE COMPTROLLER, A REASONABLE AMOUNT NECESSARY TO
 EFFECTUATE  REFUNDS OF APPROPRIATIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT TO REIMBURSE THE
 DEPARTMENT FOR THE COSTS INCURRED TO ADMINISTER, COLLECT AND  DISTRIBUTE
 THE SURCHARGE, INTEREST, AND PENALTIES IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE.
  (B)  ON  OR BEFORE THE TWELFTH DAY OF EACH MONTH, AFTER RESERVING SUCH
 AMOUNT FOR SUCH REFUNDS AND DEDUCTING SUCH AMOUNTS FOR  SUCH  COSTS,  AS
 PROVIDED  FOR IN SUBDIVISION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL
 CERTIFY TO THE COMPTROLLER THE AMOUNT OF REVENUES SO RECEIVED DURING THE
 PRIOR MONTH AS A RESULT OF THE SURCHARGE,  INTEREST,  AND  PENALTIES  SO
 IMPOSED.  NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY  PROVISION  OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY, AFTER
 DEDUCTING THE AMOUNTS SPECIFIED IN THIS SUBDIVISION, THE REMAINING FUNDS
 COLLECTED SHALL BE DEPOSITED BY THE COMPTROLLER, WITHOUT  APPROPRIATION,
 INTO THE GREEN TRANSITION FUND ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO SECTION SEVENTEEN
 HUNDRED FIFTY-FIVE OF THE PUBLIC AUTHORITIES LAW.
  §  5. The sum of ten million dollars ($10,000,000), or so much thereof
 as may be necessary, is hereby  appropriated  to  the  green  transition
 authority  from  any moneys in the state treasury in the general fund to
 the credit of the state purposes account not otherwise appropriated  for
 the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this act.  Such sum shall
 be payable on the audit and warrant of the state comptroller on vouchers
 certified or approved by the secretary of state or such secretary's duly
 designated representative in the manner provided by law.
  § 6. This act shall take effect immediately.