# Relates to the use of a medical immunization exemption form

**Bill ID:** A10417AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jaime R. Williams
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10417AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10417AA)

## Summary

Directs that a school in which a student is attending or will attend shall accept a medical immunization exemption.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10417--A
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 24, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE  ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Williams,
  Colton) -- read once and referred to the  Committee  on  Education  --
  committee  discharged,  bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended and
  recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to  a  standardized  form
  for medical exemption from required immunizations

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 3205-b
 to read as follows:
  ยง 3205-B. MEDICAL IMMUNIZATION EXEMPTION. 1. THE  SCHOOL  IN  WHICH  A
 STUDENT  IS ATTENDING OR WILL ATTEND SHALL ACCEPT A MEDICAL IMMUNIZATION
 EXEMPTION REQUEST FORM CONTAINING THE INFORMATION PURSUANT  TO  SUBDIVI-
 SION  TWO  OF  THIS SECTION.  THE DEPARTMENT OR ANY OTHER STATE AGENCY,
 BOARD OR COMMISSION SHALL NOT REQUIRE ANY OTHER CONDITION OR REQUIREMENT
 FOR THE MEDICAL EXEMPTION TO IMMUNIZATION OR IMMUNIZATIONS PROVIDED  FOR
 IN THIS SECTION FOR SCHOOL ADMISSION.
  2.  THE FORM ACCEPTED BY THE SCHOOL SHALL CONTAIN THE FOLLOWING INFOR-
 MATION:
  (A) NAME(S) OF PARENT, PARENTS OR GUARDIAN;
  (B) NAME OF CHILD;
  (C) STUDENT'S BIRTHDATE;
  (D) STUDENT'S RESIDENTIAL ADDRESS;
  (E) SCHOOL NAME AND DISTRICT;
  (F) THE MEDICAL REASON, DIAGNOSIS  AND/OR  CONDITION  OF  WHICH  DEEMS
 IMMUNIZATION DETRIMENTAL TO THE STUDENT'S HEALTH; AND
  (G)  THE  SIGNATURE  OF A LICENSED PHYSICIAN, PHYSICIAN'S ASSISTANT OR
 NURSE PRACTITIONER, THEIR MEDICAL LICENSE  NUMBER  AND  PRACTICE  AFFIL-
 IATION DECLARING: I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT IMMUNIZATION AGAINST (POLIOMYEL-
 ITIS,  MUMPS,  MEASLES,  DIPTHERIA,  RUBELLA,  VARICELLA,  HAEMOPHILUS
 INFLUENZAE TYPE  B  (HIB),  PERTUSSIS,  TETANUS,  PNEUMOCOCCAL  DISEASE,
 INFLUENZA,  MENINGOCOCCAL DISEASE AND HEPATITIS B) MAY BE DETRIMENTAL TO
 THE CHILD'S HEALTH. THE DATE AND SIGNATURE OF THE PHYSICIAN, NURSE PRAC-
 TITIONER OR PHYSICIAN'S ASSISTANT SHALL APPEAR HERE. THIS CERTIFICATION,
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15557-04-4
 A. 10417--A  2
 
 ONCE PROVIDED TO THE STUDENT'S SCHOOL, SHALL SERVE AS  AN  EXEMPTION  TO
 SECTION 2164 OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH LAW.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the thirtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.