# Establishes the Artificial Intelligence Literacy Act of 2024

**Bill ID:** A10556
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kenny Burgos
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [A10556 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10556)

## Summary

Establishes the Artificial Intelligence Literacy Act which establishes an artificial intelligence literacy in the digital equity competitive grant program.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10556
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  June 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Burgos) --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to establishing an  arti-
  ficial  intelligence  literacy in the digital equity competitive grant
  program
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Short  title. This act shall be known and may be cited as
 the "Artificial Intelligence Literacy Act of 2024".
  ยง 2. Legislative findings. The legislature,  as  well  as  the  United
 States congress, finds that:
  (1) Artificial intelligence is transformative technology.
  (2) Artificial intelligence is becoming increasingly ubiquitous making
 artificial intelligence literacy important.
  (3) Technological leadership in artificial intelligence is an economic
 and national security imperative.
  (4)  Effective  artificial intelligence literacy initiatives encompass
 not only technical training but also comprehensive education  about  the
 potential benefits and risks.
  (5) Informed developers and consumers of artificial intelligence tech-
 nologies  can help mitigate risks and biases often found in systems that
 use artificial intelligence.
  (6) Basic artificial intelligence literacy  is  critical  to  ensuring
 Americans  have  the  tools and knowledge needed to navigate the economy
 and digital world.
  (7)  Successful  artificial  intelligence  literacy  initiatives  will
 prepare  Americans of all ages and technical backgrounds to safely navi-
 gate artificial intelligence tools and  artificial  intelligence-enabled
 technologies.
  (8)  Communities  most negatively impacted by artificial intelligence-
 enabled technologies often have the least access to artificial  intelli-
 gence education.
  (9)  Artificial  intelligence  literacy initiatives must engage stake-
 holders and communities in all  stages  and  specific  outreach  efforts
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15758-02-4
 A. 10556  2
 
 should  be  made  for  communities  disproportionately  impacted  by the
 digital divide, including minority and rural communities.
  (10) Jobs for the Future survey found 58% believe that learning oppor-
 tunities  around  artificial  intelligence should be offered to workers,
 53% believe such opportunities should  be  available  to  learners,  54%
 believe  they  would feel more prepared for the future impact of artifi-
 cial intelligence if they were given learning tools for it.
  (11) As of 2018, the U.S. artificial intelligence workforce  stood  at
 about  14,000,000  workers  or  9%  of employment. Demand for artificial
 intelligence occupations is projected to grow twice as fast as  for  all
 occupations in the U.S.
  (12)  In 2021, black students made up only 7.5% of artificial intelli-
 gence-related bachelor's degrees despite making  up  14%  of  the  popu-
 lation.  Women account for 60% of college graduates and only 40% of STEM
 graduates and 25% of artificial intelligence graduates.
  (13) The need for a strong workforce of artificial intelligence  work-
 ers,  as  well  an artificial intelligence-literate population, requires
 investment in artificial intelligence literacy education.
  ยง 3. The education law is amended by adding a new section 115 to  read
 as follows:
  ยง  115. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE LITERACY IN THE DIGITAL EQUITY COMPET-
 ITIVE GRANT PROGRAM. 1.  DEFINITIONS.  AS  USED  IN  THIS  SECTION,  THE
 FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL MEAN:
  A. "ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE LITERACY" MEANS THE SKILLS ASSOCIATED WITH
 THE  ABILITY  TO COMPREHEND THE BASIC PRINCIPLES, CONCEPTS, AND APPLICA-
 TIONS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, AS WELL AS THE  IMPLICATIONS,  LIMITA-
 TIONS  AND  ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH THE USE OF ARTIFICIAL
 INTELLIGENCE.
  B. "COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION" MEANS NOT-FOR-PROFIT  COMMUNITY  ORGANIZA-
 TIONS,  OTHER  THAN A SCHOOL, COMMUNITY COLLEGE OR INSTITUTION OF HIGHER
 EDUCATION, WHICH OFFER FREE EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC.
  C. "PROGRAM" MEANS THE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE LITERACY IN THE DIGITAL
 EQUITY COMPETITIVE GRANT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER  SUBDIVISION  TWO  OF
 THIS SECTION.
  2.  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE LITERACY IN THE DIGITAL EQUITY COMPETITIVE
 GRANT PROGRAM. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL ESTABLISH AN  ARTIFICIAL  INTELLI-
 GENCE  LITERACY  IN  THE  DIGITAL EQUITY COMPETITIVE GRANT PROGRAM WHICH
 SHALL PROVIDE GRANTS TO PUBLIC ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS,  COMMU-
 NITY COLLEGES, INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION, AND COMMUNITY ORGANIZA-
 TIONS.  THE  COMMISSIONER SHALL ALSO ESTABLISH CRITERIA FOR THE DEVELOP-
 MENT AND SUBMISSION OF GRANT APPLICATIONS  AND  PROPOSALS  AND  FOR  THE
 SELECTION OF RECIPIENTS OF GRANTS FROM THE PROGRAM. SUCH PROGRAM SHALL:
  A.  PROVIDE  GRANTS  TO  PUBLIC ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS TO BE
 USED FOR:
  (I) PROVIDING TEACHERS TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION TO  SUPPORT  ARTIFI-
 CIAL INTELLIGENCE LITERACY EFFORTS IN SCHOOLS.
  (II)  FACILITATING  ATTENDANCE OF TEACHERS AT PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
 COURSES, WORKSHOPS, AND CONFERENCES RELATED TO  ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE
 EDUCATION,  INCLUDING  PROFESSIONAL  DEVELOPMENT  RELATED  TO ARTIFICIAL
 INTELLIGENCE COURSE DESIGN AND FEE-BASED PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT.
  (III) FOR SCHOOLS WITHOUT RESOURCES FOR  COMPUTER  SCIENCE  EDUCATION,
 DEVELOPING  AND  DESIGNING BEST PRACTICES FOR COMPUTER SCIENCE MATERIALS
 NEEDED FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE EDUCATION.
  (IV) SUPPORTING PARTNERSHIPS WITH THE  PRIVATE  SECTOR  TO  FACILITATE
 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE EDUCATION.
 A. 10556  3
 
  (V)  EQUIPPING  SCHOOLS WITH LABS TO PROVIDE STUDENTS HANDS-ON ARTIFI-
 CIAL INTELLIGENCE LEARNING EXPERIENCES.
  (VI)  DEVELOPING VIRTUAL LEARNING PLATFORMS THAT FACILITATE REMOTE AND
 INDIVIDUALIZED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE EDUCATION OPPORTUNITIES.
  B. PROVIDE GRANTS TO COMMUNITY COLLEGES TO BE USED FOR:
  (I) DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING AN INTERDISCIPLINARY LITERACY  PROGRAM
 WITH  RESPECT  TO  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR NON-TRADITIONAL LEARNERS,
 INCLUDING THROUGH PARTNERSHIPS  WITH  NON-PROFIT  EDUCATIONAL  ORGANIZA-
 TIONS.
  (II)  DEVELOPING LABS TO PROVIDE STUDENTS HANDS-ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLI-
 GENCE LEARNING EXPERIENCES.
  (III) DEVELOPING VIRTUAL LEARNING PLATFORMS THAT FACILITATE REMOTE AND
 INDIVIDUALIZED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE EDUCATION OPPORTUNITIES.
  C. PROVIDE GRANTS TO INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION TO BE USED FOR:
  (I) DEVELOPING LABS TO PROVIDE STUDENTS HANDS-ON  ARTIFICIAL  INTELLI-
 GENCE LEARNING EXPERIENCES.
  (II)  DEVELOPING VIRTUAL LEARNING PLATFORMS THAT FACILITATE REMOTE AND
 INDIVIDUALIZED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE EDUCATION OPPORTUNITIES.
  (III) DEVELOPING PROGRAMMING AND PEDAGOGICAL  TOOLS  WITH  RESPECT  TO
 ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  EDUCATION  AND  INSTRUCTION FOR THE BENEFIT OF
 ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS AND COMMUNITY EDUCATORS.
  D. PROVIDE GRANTS TO COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS TO BE USED FOR:
  (I) PROVIDING TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION WITH  RESPECT  TO  ARTIFICIAL
 INTELLIGENCE  EDUCATION  AND  INSTRUCTION  TO EMPLOYEES OF THE COMMUNITY
 ORGANIZATIONS.
  (II) DEVELOPING  AND  IMPLEMENTING  ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  LEARNING
 EXPERIENCES  AND  EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMMING TO THE COMMUNITY SERVED BY THE
 COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS.
  E. REQUIRE ANY ENTITY WHICH IS AWARDED A GRANT UNDER  THE  PROGRAM  TO
 SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE COMMISSIONER ON OR BEFORE JULY FIRST OF EACH YEAR
 FOR  FOUR  YEARS  FOLLOWING THE GRANT BEING AWARDED WHICH SHALL INCLUDE,
 BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (I) THE AMOUNT OF THE GRANT.
  (II) THE USE BY THE ENTITY OF THE GRANT AMOUNTS.
  (III) THE PROGRESS OF THE ENTITY TOWARDS FULFILLING THE OBJECTIVES FOR
 WHICH THE GRANT WAS AWARDED.
  3. REPORTS. ON OR BEFORE JANUARY FIRST NEXT SUCCEEDING  THE  EFFECTIVE
 DATE OF THIS SECTION AND EACH JANUARY FIRST THEREAFTER, THE COMMISSIONER
 SHALL  SUBMIT  A  REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR, THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT OF THE
 SENATE, THE SPEAKER OF THE ASSEMBLY, AND THE CHAIRS OF  THE  SENATE  AND
 ASSEMBLY  EDUCATION  COMMITTEES  AND  HIGHER  EDUCATION COMMITTEES WHICH
 SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED  TO,  SUMMARIZING  AND  ANALYZING  THE
 REPORTS  SUBMITTED TO THE COMMISSIONER FOR THAT YEAR AND IDENTIFYING ANY
 SPECIFIC USE DESCRIBED BY A REPORT THAT THE COMMISSIONER RECOMMENDS  FOR
 EXPANSION OR MODIFICATION TO BENEFIT GREATER POPULATIONS.
  ยง  4. This act shall take effect one year after it shall have become a
 law. Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or repeal of any
 rule or regulation necessary for the implementation of this act  on  its
 effective date are authorized to be made and completed on or before such
 effective date.