# Enacts the "cash acceptance act"

**Bill ID:** A105A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Nader Sayegh
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A105A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A105A)

## Summary

Prohibits food-service and retail establishments from refusing to accept cash as payment for goods or services; calls for a civil fine if an establishment should refuse cash as payment.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  105
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. SAYEGH -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Consumer Affairs and Protection
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the general business law, in relation to prohibiting
  retail establishments from refusing to accept payment in cash

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  This  act  shall  be  known and may be cited as the "cash
 acceptance act".
  ยง 2. The general business law is amended by adding a new section  396-
 ii to read as follows:
  ยง  396-II.  CASHLESS  POLICIES PROHIBITED. A. AS USED IN THIS SECTION,
 THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  (I) "FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT" SHALL  MEAN  AN  ESTABLISHMENT  WHICH
 GIVES OR OFFERS FOR SALE FOOD OR BEVERAGES TO THE PUBLIC FOR CONSUMPTION
 OR USE ON OR OFF THE PREMISES.
  (II)  "RETAIL  ESTABLISHMENT"  SHALL  MEAN  AN  ESTABLISHMENT IN WHICH
 CONSUMER COMMODITIES ARE SOLD, DISPLAYED OR OFFERED FOR SALE,  OR  WHICH
 PROVIDES SERVICES TO CONSUMERS AT RETAIL.
  B.  IT  SHALL BE UNLAWFUL FOR A FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT OR A RETAIL
 ESTABLISHMENT, AS POLICY, TO REFUSE  TO  ACCEPT  PAYMENT  IN  CASH  FROM
 CONSUMERS.
  C. A FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT OR RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT VIOLATING THIS
 SECTION  IS  LIABLE  FOR  A  CIVIL  PENALTY OF NOT MORE THAN TWENTY-FIVE
 HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR THE FIRST VIOLATION AND A CIVIL PENALTY OF NOT  MORE
 THAN FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR EACH SUCCEEDING VIOLATION.
  D.  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  LABOR  MAY  PROMULGATE SUCH RULES AS IT DEEMS
 NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT AND ENFORCE THIS SECTION.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01516-02-3