# Relates to notice of adult care facility closure requirements

**Bill ID:** A10560
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jo Anne Simon
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10560 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10560)

## Summary

Relates to notice of adult care facility closure requirements.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10560
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  June 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE  ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Simon) --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the social services law, in relation to notice of  adult
  care facility closure requirements
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The social services law is amended by adding a new  section
 461-v to read as follows:
  ยง  461-V.  NOTICE  OF  ADULT  CARE  FACILITY CLOSURE; REQUIREMENTS. 1.
 IMMEDIATELY UPON THE SUBMISSION OF A NOTICE OF SUSPENSION OR  REVOCATION
 OF  AN  OPERATING  CERTIFICATE FROM THE DEPARTMENT TO THE OPERATOR OF AN
 ADULT CARE FACILITY, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT  ELECTRONIC  COPIES  OF
 SUCH  NOTICE  WITH  SUPPORTING  DOCUMENTATION TO THE GOVERNOR, THE STATE
 COMPTROLLER, THE INVESTIGATIONS AND HEALTH CARE BUREAUS OF THE OFFICE OF
 THE NEW YORK STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL, THE MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATURE THAT
 REPRESENT THE AREA WHERE THE FACILITY IS LOCATED, AND THE  EXECUTIVE  OF
 THE  COUNTY  WHERE  THE  FACILITY  IS LOCATED. SUCH WRITTEN NOTICE SHALL
 INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (A) THE NAME OF THE OPERATOR AND THE OPERATOR'S CURRENT ADDRESS;
  (B) IDENTIFICATION OF THE LOCATION OF THE ADULT CARE FACILITY;
  (C) THE DATE ON WHICH THE DEPARTMENT'S  REVOCATION  OR  SUSPENSION  OF
 OPERATING CERTIFICATE SHALL TAKE EFFECT; AND
  (D)  A  BRIEF  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE NATURE OF THE VIOLATIONS THAT HAVE
 NECESSITATED THE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF  THE  FACILITY'S  OPERATING
 CERTIFICATE.
  2.  (A)  EXCEPT  AS  PROVIDED  IN  PARAGRAPH  (B) OF THIS SUBDIVISION,
 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AS DESCRIBED IN SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION
 SHALL NOT BE SUBJECT TO DISCLOSURE UNDER ARTICLE SIX OF THE PUBLIC OFFI-
 CERS LAW.
  (B) DURING THE THIRTY-DAY  PERIOD  PRIOR  TO  THE  CLOSING  DATE,  THE
 DEPARTMENT SHALL POST ON ITS WEBSITE:
  (I) A SUMMARY OF THE VIOLATIONS AT THE ADULT CARE FACILITY;
  (II) AN EXPLANATION OF THE GROUPS OR INDIVIDUALS LIKELY TO BE IMPACTED
 BY THE CLOSURE; AND
  (III)  A  SUMMARY  OF THE FACILITY OPERATOR'S PLAN TO ENSURE CONTINUED
 CARE FOR ALL RESIDENTS TO BE IMPACTED.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14928-01-4