# Provides for reimbursement for certain insurance premiums for certain members of the naval militia

**Bill ID:** A10587
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pamela J. Hunter
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10587 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10587)

## Summary

Provides for reimbursement for certain insurance premiums for certain members of the naval militia.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10587
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  June 20, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Hunter) --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN ACT  to  amend  the  military  law,  in  relation  to  providing  for
  reimbursement  for  certain  insurance premiums for certain members of
  the naval militia
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Section 210 of the military law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 10 to read as follows:
  10. A. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISION OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY,  ANY  NEW
 YORK  RESIDENT  MEMBER OF THE NAVAL MILITIA WHO, WHEN ACTIVATED PURSUANT
 TO A CALL OF THE GOVERNOR OF THIS STATE OR ANY OTHER STATE  AS  PROVIDED
 FOR  BY  LAW,  SHALL  BE REIMBURSED BY THE STATE FOR PREMIUMS ASSOCIATED
 WITH ANY INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE POLICY, INCLUDING BENEFITS
 PURSUANT TO CHAPTER 55 OF PART II OF SUBTITLE A OF TITLE X, 10 U.S.C  §§
 1071-1110(B),  COMMONLY  KNOWN  AS  TRICARE,  OF WHICH THE NAVAL MILITIA
 MEMBER IS A POLICY OWNER OR BENEFICIARY.
  B. SUCH REIMBURSEMENT SHALL EQUAL ONE-THIRTIETH THE AMOUNT OF A  NAVAL
 MILITIA MEMBER'S MONTHLY PREMIUM FOR EACH DAY OF SERVICE.
  C.  THE  STATE  SHALL NOT BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF HEALTH
 INSURANCE POLICIES ON BEHALF OF MEMBERS OF THE MILITIA.
  D. PREMIUMS REIMBURSED FOR THE PROVISION OF  SERVICE  MEMBERS'  HEALTH
 INSURANCE SHALL BE PAID ONLY TO PROVIDE COVERAGE THAT IS NOT PAID FOR OR
 REIMBURSED BY ANY OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY. IN NO EVENT SHALL A SERVICE
 MEMBER  WHO  DECLINES HEALTH INSURANCE BE ENTITLED TO ANY DIRECT PAYMENT
 PURSUANT TO THE TERMS OF THIS SECTION.
  E. THE ADJUTANT GENERAL SHALL, IN CONSULTATION WITH  THE  STATE  COMP-
 TROLLER,  PROMULGATE  RULES  AND  REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THE
 PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBDIVISION.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11572-01-3