# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Purple Heart Trail"

**Bill ID:** A10635
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Matthew Slater
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10635 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10635)

## Summary

Designates all that portion of the state and local highway system constituting route thirty-five between United States route two hundred two and state route one hundred as the "Purple Heart Trail".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10635
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  June 20, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Slater) --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "Purple Heart Trail"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 342-aaa
 to read as follows:
  ยง 342-AAA. PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "PURPLE HEART TRAIL". ALL THAT PORTION OF THE STATE  AND  LOCAL  HIGHWAY
 SYSTEM  CONSTITUTING  ROUTE  THIRTY-FIVE BETWEEN UNITED STATES ROUTE TWO
 HUNDRED TWO AND STATE ROUTE ONE  HUNDRED  SHALL  BE  DESIGNATED  AS  THE
 "PURPLE HEART TRAIL".
  ยง  2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the instal-
 lation and maintenance of adequate signing of the state  highway  system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this act. The use and placement
 of  such  signs shall be determined by the local municipality.  However,
 to avoid confusion and to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the
 designation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall be  one
 of  ceremonial nature and the official name of such highway shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15515-01-4