# Requires certain public schools to offer Halal food options and Kosher food options during lunch

**Bill ID:** A10651
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Monica P. Wallace
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10651 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10651)

## Summary

Requires schools that have a Muslim or Jewish population greater than or equal to ten percent of the student body to offer Halal food options and/or Kosher food options during lunch.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10651
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  July 22, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by COMMITTEE ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Wallace) --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law,  in  relation  to  requiring  certain
  public  schools  to  offer  Halal food options and Kosher food options
  during lunch
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  education  law is amended by adding two new sections
 915-a and 915-b to read as follows:
  ยง 915-A. HALAL FOOD OPTIONS. ANY SCHOOL OR SCHOOL DISTRICT  WHERE  THE
 BOARD  OF  EDUCATION  OR  TRUSTEES  DETERMINE THAT SUCH SCHOOL OR SCHOOL
 DISTRICT HAS A MUSLIM POPULATION GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO TEN PERCENT OF
 THE STUDENT BODY OR WHERE HALAL FOOD OPTIONS ARE OTHERWISE REQUESTED  BY
 RELEVANT  INDIVIDUALS  OR ENTITIES SHALL OFFER HALAL FOOD OPTIONS DURING
 LUNCH.
  ยง 915-B. KOSHER FOOD OPTIONS. ANY SCHOOL OR SCHOOL DISTRICT WHERE  THE
 BOARD  OF  EDUCATION  OR  TRUSTEES  DETERMINE THAT SUCH SCHOOL OR SCHOOL
 DISTRICT HAS A JEWISH POPULATION GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO TWO PERCENT OF
 THE STUDENT BODY OR WHERE KOSHER FOOD OPTIONS ARE OTHERWISE REQUESTED BY
 RELEVANT INDIVIDUALS OR ENTITIES SHALL OFFER KOSHER FOOD OPTIONS  DURING
 LUNCH.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rules or regulations necessary for the  imple-
 mentation  of  this  act on its effective date are authorized to be made
 and completed on or before such date.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06318-03-4