# Establishes the parole board accountability act

**Bill ID:** A10655
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Stephen Hawley
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10655 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10655)

## Summary

Establishes the parole board accountability act which requires incarcerated individuals who are released on parole, via a vote that is not unanimous, be placed in the community where one of the two board members primarily reside; establishes the procedure of which of the two board member's community the releasee shall be released to.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10655
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  July 22, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Hawley) --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Correction
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive  law,  in  relation  to  establishing  the
  parole board accountability act.
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Short title. This act shall be known and may  be  cited  as
 the "parole board accountability act".
  ยง  2.  The  executive  law is amended by adding a new section 259-u to
 read as follows:
  ยง 259-U.  PAROLE BOARD ACCOUNTABILITY. 1. WHERE THE BOARD  VOTES  THAT
 AN  INCARCERATED  INDIVIDUAL BE RELEASED ON PAROLE, BUT SUCH VOTE IS NOT
 UNANIMOUS, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DIRECT SUCH RELEASEE BE  RELEASED  TO  A
 SHELTER,  HALFWAY  HOUSE,  OR A TRANSITIONAL RESIDENTIAL FACILITY IN THE
 COMMUNITY OF ONE OF THE TWO BOARD MEMBERS WHO  VOTED  IN  FAVOR  OF  THE
 RELEASEE PRIMARILY RESIDE.
  2.  THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL RELY ON A COIN FLIP TO DETERMINE WHICH OF
 THE TWO BOARD MEMBER'S COMMUNITY THE RELEASEE SHALL BE RELEASED TO. SUCH
 COIN FLIP SHALL BE CONDUCTED AND MADE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE VIA LIVE STREAM
 ON THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE.
  3. UPON THE RESULTS OF SUCH COIN FLIP PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION  TWO  OF
 THIS  SECTION,  THE  DEPARTMENT  SHALL PLACE SUCH RELEASEE IN A SHELTER,
 HALFWAY HOUSE, OR A TRANSITIONAL RESIDENTIAL FACILITY THAT IS  GEOGRAPH-
 ICALLY  CLOSEST  TO  THE BOARD MEMBER'S PRIMARY RESIDENCE WHO WAS CHOSEN
 PURSUANT TO SUCH COIN FLIP.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15861-01-4