# Requires verification of property and rental listings on online property marketplaces

**Bill ID:** A10669
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Clyde Vanel
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10669 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10669)

## Summary

Requires online property marketplaces to verify that the person listing or claiming the property or rental is authorized to do so prior to allowing a property or rental to be listed on its website, application or software or permitting any person to claim ownership of an existing property or rental listing.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10669
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  July 22, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE  ON RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Vanel) --
  read once and referred  to  the  Committee  on  Consumer  Affairs  and
  Protection
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  general  business law, in relation to requiring
  verification of  property  and  rental  listings  on  online  property
  marketplaces
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The general business law is amended by adding a new section
 396-ddd to read as follows:
  ยง 396-DDD. VERIFICATION OF PROPERTY  AND  RENTAL  LISTINGS  ON  ONLINE
 PROPERTY  MARKETPLACES.  1. NO ONLINE PROPERTY MARKETPLACE SHALL ALLOW A
 PROPERTY OR RENTAL TO BE LISTED ON ITS WEBSITE, APPLICATION OR  SOFTWARE
 NOR  PERMIT  ANY  PERSON  TO  CLAIM OWNERSHIP OF AN EXISTING PROPERTY OR
 RENTAL LISTING WITHOUT FIRST VERIFYING THAT THE PERSON LISTING OR CLAIM-
 ING THE PROPERTY OR RENTAL IS AUTHORIZED TO DO SO. FOR THE  PURPOSES  OF
 THIS  SECTION,  "ONLINE  PROPERTY  MARKETPLACE"  SHALL MEAN ANY WEBSITE,
 APPLICATION, OR SOFTWARE CONNECTED TO THE INTERNET WHICH, IN THE REGULAR
 COURSE OF BUSINESS, ALLOWS MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO ADD AND VIEW PROPER-
 TY OR RENTAL LISTINGS AND WHICH PROVIDE  A  CONTACT  METHOD  OR  CONTACT
 INFORMATION TO CONTACT THE OWNERS OR AGENTS OF SUCH PROPERTIES OR RENTAL
 LISTINGS.
  2.  THE VERIFICATION REQUIRED BY SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION SHALL
 BE CONDUCTED THROUGH A METHOD REASONABLY DESIGNED TO DETECT AND  PREVENT
 FRAUDULENT PROPERTY OR RENTAL CLAIMS AND LISTINGS.
  3.  AN ONLINE PROPERTY MARKETPLACE SHALL BE LIABLE FOR A CIVIL PENALTY
 OF FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS PER  LISTING  WHICH  IS  LISTED  OR  CLAIMED  IN
 VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION.
  ยง  2. This act shall take effect one year after it shall have become a
 law.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15916-02-4