# Requires vehicles operated by public transit authorities to contain opioid antagonists

**Bill ID:** A10715
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Monica P. Wallace
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A10715 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A10715)

## Summary

Requires vehicles operated by public transit authorities to contain opioid antagonists and for public transit authorities to train employees on the proper use of opioid antagonists.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  10715
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  September 18, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  COMMITTEE  ON  RULES -- (at request of M. of A. Wallace,
  K. Brown) -- read once and referred to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to requiring vehicles
  operated by public transit authorities to contain opioid antagonists
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Subparagraph  (v)  of  paragraph  (a) of subdivision 3 of
 section 3309 of the public health law, as added by chapter  148  of  the
 laws  of  2020, is amended and a new subparagraph (vii) is added to read
 as follows:
  (v) As used in this section, "entity" includes, but is not limited to,
 a school district, public  library,  board  of  cooperative  educational
 services,  county  vocational  education  and  extension  board, charter
 school, non-public elementary  or  secondary  school,  restaurant,  bar,
 retail store, shopping mall, barber shop, beauty parlor, theater, sport-
 ing or event center, PUBLIC TRANSIT AUTHORITY, inn, hotel or motel.
  (VII)  AS  USED  IN  THIS  SECTION, "PUBLIC TRANSIT AUTHORITY" MEANS A
 PUBLIC AUTHORITY ESTABLISHED UNDER  THE  PUBLIC  AUTHORITIES  LAW  WHICH
 PROVIDES TRANSPORTATION SERVICES.
  ยง  2. Section 3309 of the public health law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 9 to read as follows:
  9. EVERY VEHICLE OPERATED BY A PUBLIC TRANSIT AUTHORITY SHALL  CONTAIN
 AN  OPIOID ANTAGONIST.  PUBLIC TRANSIT AUTHORITIES SHALL PROVIDE TRAIN-
 ING, APPROVED BY THE COMMISSIONER, TO EMPLOYEES ON THE PROPER USE OF  AN
 OPIOID ANTAGONIST.
  ยง  3.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.  Effective  immediately,  the  addition,  amendment
 and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implementation
 of  this  act  on  its  effective  date  are  authorized  to be made and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13927-01-3