# Relates to wage theft

**Bill ID:** A154AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Catalina Cruz
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A154AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A154AA)

## Summary

Adds wage theft to the types of activities included in the crime of larceny.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  154--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  CRUZ, AUBRY, DeSTEFANO, DICKENS, COOK, FALL,
  EPSTEIN, WILLIAMS, McMAHON, WEPRIN, VANEL, McDONOUGH, RAMOS, JACOBSON,
  STECK, LUPARDO, BRABENEC,  BURGOS,  DINOWITZ,  COLTON,  ROZIC,  REYES,
  LUCAS,  CARROLL,  THIELE,  GONZALEZ-ROJAS,  BORES,  HEVESI,  WOERNER,
  BURDICK, BUTTENSCHON -- read once and referred  to  the  Committee  on
  Codes  --  committee  discharged,  bill  amended, ordered reprinted as
  amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to wage theft
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Subdivision  1  of  section  155.00  of the penal law, as
 amended by chapter 514 of the laws of 1986, is amended and a new  subdi-
 vision 10 is added to read as follows:
  1.  "Property"  means  any  money, COMPENSATION FOR LABOR OR SERVICES,
 personal property, real property, computer data, computer program, thing
 in action, evidence of debt or contract, or any  article,  substance  or
 thing of value, including any gas, steam, water or electricity, which is
 provided for a charge or compensation.
  10.  "WORKFORCE"  MEANS  A  GROUP  OF  ONE OR MORE PERSONS WHO WORK IN
 EXCHANGE FOR WAGES.
  ยง 2. Subdivision 2 of section 155.05 of the penal law  is  amended  by
 adding a new paragraph (f) to read as follows:
  (F) BY WAGE THEFT.
  A  PERSON OBTAINS PROPERTY BY WAGE THEFT WHEN HE OR SHE HIRES A PERSON
 TO PERFORM SERVICES AND THE PERSON PERFORMS SUCH SERVICES AND THE PERSON
 DOES NOT PAY WAGES, AT THE MINIMUM WAGE RATE AND OVERTIME,  OR  PROMISED
 WAGE, IF GREATER THAN THE MINIMUM WAGE RATE AND OVERTIME, TO SAID PERSON
 FOR  WORK PERFORMED.  IN A PROSECUTION FOR WAGE THEFT, FOR THE PURPOSES
 OF VENUE, IT IS PERMISSIBLE TO AGGREGATE ALL  NONPAYMENTS  OR  UNDERPAY-
 MENTS TO ONE PERSON FROM ONE PERSON, INTO ONE LARCENY COUNT, EVEN IF THE
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01997-02-3
 A. 154--A  2
 
 NONPAYMENTS  OR  UNDERPAYMENTS OCCURRED IN MULTIPLE COUNTIES. IT IS ALSO
 PERMISSIBLE TO AGGREGATE NONPAYMENTS OR UNDERPAYMENTS FROM  A  WORKFORCE
 INTO  ONE  LARCENY  COUNT  EVEN  IF  SUCH  NONPAYMENTS  OR UNDERPAYMENTS
 OCCURRED IN MULTIPLE COUNTIES.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.