# Creates the blue light emergency phones pilot program and directs the commissioner of parks and recreation to study and report upon the use of such program

**Bill ID:** A178
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Simcha Eichenstein
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A178 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A178)

## Summary

Creates the blue light emergency phones pilot program in all five boroughs and directs the commissioner of parks, recreation and historic preservation to study and report upon the use of such program.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  178
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  EICHENSTEIN -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Cities
 
 AN ACT to amend the administrative code of the  city  of  New  York,  in
  relation to creating the blue light emergency phones pilot program and
  to direct the commissioner of parks and recreation to study and report
  upon the use of such program
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The administrative code of the city of New York is  amended
 by adding a new section 18-159 to read as follows:
  ยง 18-159 BLUE LIGHT EMERGENCY PHONES PILOT PROGRAM. IN ONE PARK, OPER-
 ATED BY OR UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF THE DEPARTMENT, IN EACH OF THE FIVE
 BOROUGHS,  THE  DEPARTMENT SHALL IMPLEMENT A BLUE LIGHT EMERGENCY PHONES
 PILOT PROGRAM FOR THE PURPOSE OF PUBLIC SAFETY. UNDER SUCH PROGRAM,  THE
 DEPARTMENT  SHALL INSTALL BLUE LIGHTED EMERGENCY PHONES THAT, WHEN USED,
 SHALL AUTOMATICALLY DIAL 9-1-1 AND RING DIRECTLY TO THE  POLICE  DEPART-
 MENT.
  ยง  2.  The commissioner of parks and recreation shall cause a study to
 be performed to analyze how the implementation of blue  light  emergency
 phones  pilot  program  in parks impacts public safety compared to parks
 without such a program.
  ยง 3. On or  before  three  hundred  sixty-five  days  after  all  five
 locations  identified  for the blue light emergency phones pilot program
 have become operational, the commissioner of parks and recreation  shall
 complete  the  study  conducted  pursuant to section two of this act and
 shall thereafter deliver a copy of the findings of  the  study  and  any
 legislative  recommendations  he  or  she  deems  to be necessary to the
 governor, the temporary president of the  senate,  the  speaker  of  the
 assembly and the mayor of the city of New York.
  ยง  4.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00155-01-3