# Relates to improving educational outcomes for homeless school age children

**Bill ID:** A4338
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Alicia Hyndman
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4338 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4338)

## Summary

Relates to improving educational outcomes for homeless school age children.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4338
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. HYNDMAN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to improving  educational
  outcomes for homeless school age children
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Subdivision 10 of section 3209  of  the  education  law  is
 renumbered  subdivision  12 and two new subdivisions 10 and 11 are added
 to read as follows:
  10. A. BY JANUARY THIRTY-FIRST, TWO THOUSAND  TWENTY-FIVE,  AND  EVERY
 ODD-NUMBERED  YEAR  THEREAFTER,  THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL  SUBMIT TO THE
 GOVERNOR AND THE LEGISLATURE A REPORT INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO:
  (1) THE NUMBER OF IDENTIFIED HOMELESS SCHOOL AGE CHILDREN ENROLLED  IN
 PUBLIC SCHOOLS;
  (2)  THE  ACADEMIC  PERFORMANCE  AND  EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES OF HOMELESS
 SCHOOL AGE CHILDREN, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE FOLLOWING:
  (I) STUDENT SCORES ON THE STATEWIDE ADMINISTERED ACADEMIC ASSESSMENTS;
  (II) ENGLISH LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY;
  (III) DROPOUT RATES;
  (IV) FOUR-YEAR ADJUSTED GRADUATION RATE;
  (V) FIVE-YEAR ADJUSTED GRADUATION RATE;
  (VI) ABSENTEEISM RATES;
  (VII) TRUANCY RATES, IF AVAILABLE; AND
  (VIII) SUSPENSION AND EXPULSION DATA.
  B. THE DATA REPORTED PURSUANT TO PARAGRAPH A OF THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL
 INCLUDE STATE AND DISTRICT-LEVEL INFORMATION AND MUST  BE  DISAGGREGATED
 BY  AT  LEAST  THE  FOLLOWING  SUBGROUPS  OF SCHOOL AGE CHILDREN: WHITE,
 BLACK,  HISPANIC,  AMERICAN  INDIAN/ALASKAN  NATIVE,  ASIAN,  PACIFIC
 ISLANDER/HAWAIIAN  NATIVE,  LOW INCOME, TRANSITIONAL BILINGUAL, MIGRANT,
 SPECIAL EDUCATION, AND GENDER.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06400-01-3
 A. 4338  2
 
  11. THE COMMISSIONER, IN COLLABORATION  WITH  EXPERTS  FROM  COMMUNITY
 ORGANIZATIONS  ON  HOMELESSNESS  AND  HOMELESS  EDUCATION  POLICY, SHALL
 DEVELOP A HOMELESS EDUCATION POLICY ON HOW TO  BETTER  PROVIDE  SERVICES
 AND SUPPORT TO HOMELESS SCHOOL AGE CHILDREN AND ON HOW TO UTILIZE FEDER-
 AL TITLE I FUNDING.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.