# Relates to establishing a ranked choice voting method for general elections, special elections and primaries within the state

**Bill ID:** A4351
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Daniel O'Donnell
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4351 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4351)

## Summary

Establishes a ranked choice voting method to be implemented by local governments for use in general elections, special elections and primaries within the state.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4351
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  O'DONNELL  --  read once and referred to the
  Committee on Election Law
 
 AN ACT to amend the election law, in relation to establishing  a  ranked
  choice  voting  method  for  general  elections, special elections and
  primaries within the state

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The election law is amended by adding a new article 18 to
 read as follows:
  ARTICLE 18
  RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD
 SECTION 18-100. DEFINITIONS.
  18-102. RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD FOR STATE ELECTIONS.
  18-104. RANKED  CHOICE  VOTING  METHOD  PERMITTED  FOR  LOCAL
  ELECTIONS.
  18-106. RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD; BALLOTS.
  18-108. RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD; PROCEDURES.
  18-110. VOTER EDUCATION.
  18-112. CONSTRUCTION.
  §  18-100.  DEFINITIONS. 1. "RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD" SHALL MEAN A
 METHOD OF CASTING AND TABULATING VOTES THAT SIMULATES THE BALLOT  COUNTS
 THAT  WOULD  OCCUR  IF  ALL  VOTERS  PARTICIPATED  IN A SERIES OF RUNOFF
 ELECTIONS, WHEREBY THE VOTERS RANK CANDIDATES ACCORDING TO THE ORDER  OF
 THEIR CHOICE AND, IF NO CANDIDATE HAS RECEIVED A MAJORITY OF VOTES CAST,
 THEN  THE CANDIDATE WITH THE FEWEST FIRST CHOICE VOTES IS ELIMINATED AND
 THE REMAINING CANDIDATES ADVANCE TO ANOTHER  COUNTING  ROUND.  IN  EVERY
 ROUND, EACH BALLOT IS COUNTED AS ONE VOTE FOR THE HIGHEST RANKED ADVANC-
 ING CANDIDATE.
  2.  "LOCAL  GOVERNMENT"  SHALL  MEAN A COUNTY, CITY, TOWN, VILLAGE, OR
 SCHOOL DISTRICT.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08970-01-3
 A. 4351  2
 
  § 18-102. RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD  FOR  STATE  ELECTIONS.  1.  THE
 STATE  BOARD  OF  ELECTIONS IS HEREBY AUTHORIZED TO PROMULGATE RULES AND
 REGULATIONS MANDATING ALL COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS TO CONDUCT ALL STATE
 ELECTIONS, INCLUDING GENERAL ELECTIONS, SPECIAL ELECTIONS AND PRIMARIES,
 TO  BE  HELD  IN  THE  YEAR  TWO  THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE AND FOR ALL STATE
 ELECTIONS HELD THEREAFTER, UTILIZING THE RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD.
  2. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE SHALL APPLY ONLY WHEN THREE OR  MORE
 CANDIDATES  HAVE BEEN NOMINATED OR DESIGNATED FOR A STATE ELECTED OFFICE
 ENUMERATED IN SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION.
  § 18-104. RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD PERMITTED FOR  LOCAL  ELECTIONS.
 1.  FOR  ALL LOCAL ELECTIONS TO BE HELD IN THE YEAR TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-
 FIVE AND FOR ALL LOCAL ELECTIONS HELD THEREAFTER, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS  ARE
 HEREBY PERMITTED TO CONDUCT ELECTIONS UTILIZING THE RANKED CHOICE VOTING
 METHOD FOR ALL LOCAL ELECTIONS IN THE STATE.
  2.  IN  ORDER TO IMPLEMENT THE RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD AS PROVIDED
 IN SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION, THE  GOVERNING  BODY  OF  THE  LOCAL
 GOVERNMENT SHALL ADOPT A RESOLUTION IMPLEMENTING THE RANKED CHOICE METH-
 OD  AS AUTHORIZED BY THIS ARTICLE. SUCH RESOLUTION SHALL BE SUBJECT TO A
 PERMISSIVE REFERENDUM.
  3. SUCH RESOLUTION SHALL BE ADOPTED BY  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OF  THE
 LOCAL  GOVERNMENT  AT  LEAST  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTY DAYS BEFORE THE LOCAL
 ELECTION FOR WHICH RANKED CHOICE VOTING SHALL BE UTILIZED.
  4. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE SHALL APPLY ONLY WHEN THREE OR  MORE
 CANDIDATES HAVE BEEN NOMINATED OR DESIGNATED FOR AN OFFICE ENUMERATED IN
 SUBDIVISION  ONE  OF  THIS  SECTION, AND THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE LOCAL
 GOVERNMENT HAS ENACTED  A  RESOLUTION  IMPLEMENTING  THE  RANKED  CHOICE
 VOTING METHOD.
  § 18-106. RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD; BALLOTS. 1. FOR OFFICES SUBJECT
 TO  THE RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD, THE BALLOT SHALL BE SIMPLE AND EASY
 TO UNDERSTAND AND ALLOW A VOTER TO RANK  CANDIDATES  FOR  AN  OFFICE  IN
 ORDER OF CHOICE. A VOTER MAY INCLUDE NO MORE THAN ONE WRITE-IN CANDIDATE
 AMONG THAT VOTER'S RANKED CHOICES FOR EACH OFFICE.  IF FEASIBLE, BALLOTS
 SHALL BE DESIGNED SO THAT A VOTER MAY MARK THAT VOTER'S FIRST CHOICES IN
 THE  SAME  MANNER  AS  THAT FOR OFFICES NOT ELECTED BY THE RANKED CHOICE
 VOTING METHOD.
  2. INSTRUCTIONS ON THE  BALLOT  SHALL  CONFORM  SUBSTANTIALLY  TO  THE
 FOLLOWING  SPECIFICATIONS,  ALTHOUGH  SUBJECT  TO MODIFICATION, BASED ON
 BALLOT DESIGN AND VOTING MACHINE:
  "VOTE FOR CANDIDATES BY INDICATING  YOUR  FIRST-CHOICE  CANDIDATES  IN
 ORDER  OF  PREFERENCE.  INDICATE YOUR FIRST CHOICE BY MARKING THE NUMBER
 "1" BESIDE A CANDIDATE'S NAME, YOUR SECOND CHOICE BY MARKING THE  NUMBER
 "2"  BESIDE  A CANDIDATE'S NAME, YOUR THIRD CHOICE BY MARKING THE NUMBER
 "3" BESIDE A CANDIDATE'S NAME AND SO ON, FOR  AS  MANY  CHOICES  AS  YOU
 WISH.  YOU MAY CHOOSE TO RANK ONLY ONE CANDIDATE, BUT RANKING ADDITIONAL
 CANDIDATES WILL NOT HURT THE CHANCES OF YOUR FIRST-CHOICE CANDIDATE.  DO
 NOT  MARK  THE  SAME  NUMBER BESIDE MORE THAN ONE CANDIDATE. DO NOT SKIP
 NUMBERS."
  3. A SAMPLE BALLOT FOR AN OFFICE SUBJECT TO THE RANKED  CHOICE  VOTING
 METHOD  SHALL  ILLUSTRATE  THE  VOTING  PROCEDURE  FOR THE RANKED CHOICE
 VOTING METHOD.  SUCH A SAMPLE BALLOT SHALL BE INCLUDED WITH EACH  ABSEN-
 TEE BALLOT.
  4.  THE APPROPRIATE ELECTION OFFICIAL FOR A LOCAL GOVERNMENT WHERE THE
 RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD HAS BEEN AUTHORIZED BY SUCH LOCAL GOVERNMENT
 SHALL INSURE THAT THE NECESSARY VOTING SYSTEM, VOTE  TABULATION  SYSTEM,
 OR  OTHER SIMILAR OR RELATED EQUIPMENT SHALL BE AVAILABLE TO ACCOMMODATE
 THE RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD.
 A. 4351  3
 
  § 18-108. RANKED  CHOICE  VOTING  METHOD;  PROCEDURES.  THE  FOLLOWING
 PROCEDURES  SHALL  APPLY IN DETERMINING THE WINNER IN AN ELECTION FOR AN
 OFFICE SUBJECT TO THE RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD:
  1.  THE  FIRST CHOICE MARKED ON EACH BALLOT SHALL BE COUNTED INITIALLY
 BY ELECTION OFFICIALS. IF ONE CANDIDATE RECEIVES A MAJORITY OF THE VOTES
 CAST, EXCLUDING BLANK AND VOID BALLOTS, THAT CANDIDATE SHALL BE DECLARED
 ELECTED.
  2. IF NO CANDIDATE RECEIVES A MAJORITY OF FIRST-CHOICE VOTES  CAST  AT
 THE  END OF THE INITIAL COUNT, THE CANDIDATE RECEIVING THE FEWEST FIRST-
 CHOICE VOTES SHALL BE ELIMINATED. EACH  VOTE  CAST  FOR  THE  ELIMINATED
 CANDIDATE SHALL BE TRANSFERRED TO THE CANDIDATE WHO WAS THE VOTER'S NEXT
 CHOICE ON THE BALLOT.
  3.  CANDIDATES  WITH THE FEWEST VOTES SHALL CONTINUE TO BE ELIMINATED,
 WITH THE VOTES FOR SUCH CANDIDATES TRANSFERRED TO THE CANDIDATE WHO  WAS
 EACH  VOTER'S  NEXT  CHOICE  ON  THE BALLOT UNTIL A CANDIDATE RECEIVES A
 MAJORITY OF THE VOTES CAST, EXCLUDING BLANK AND  VOID  BALLOTS.  WHEN  A
 CANDIDATE RECEIVES A MAJORITY OF THE VOTES CAST, THAT CANDIDATE SHALL BE
 DECLARED ELECTED.
  4. IF A BALLOT HAS NO MORE AVAILABLE CHOICES RANKED ON IT, THAT BALLOT
 SHALL  BE  DECLARED EXHAUSTED. WHERE A BALLOT SKIPS ONE OR MORE NUMBERS,
 THAT BALLOT SHALL BE DECLARED EXHAUSTED WHEN THE SKIPPING OF NUMBERS  IS
 REACHED.  A BALLOT WITH THE SAME NUMBER FOR TWO OR MORE CANDIDATES SHALL
 BE DECLARED EXHAUSTED WHEN THESE DOUBLE NUMBERS ARE REACHED.
  5. IN THE CASE OF A TIE BETWEEN CANDIDATES FOR LAST  PLACE,  AND  THUS
 ELIMINATION,  OCCURRING AT ANY STAGE IN THE TABULATION, THE TIE SHALL BE
 RESOLVED SO AS TO ELIMINATE THE CANDIDATE WHO RECEIVED THE LEAST  NUMBER
 OF  VOTES  AT  THE PREVIOUS STAGE OF TABULATION. IN THE CASE OF A TIE TO
 WHICH A PREVIOUS STAGE DOES NOT APPLY, OR SUCH PREVIOUS STAGE WAS ALSO A
 TIE, THE TIE SHALL BE RESOLVED BY DRAWING  LOTS.  HOWEVER,  IF  THE  TIE
 OCCURS  WHEN  THERE  ARE ONLY TWO CANDIDATES REMAINING, THE TIE SHALL BE
 RESOLVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER.
  § 18-110. VOTER EDUCATION. WHERE  A  LOCAL  GOVERNMENT  SHALL  PASS  A
 RESOLUTION  AUTHORIZING  THE  RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD, THE GOVERNING
 BODY SHALL CONDUCT A VOTER  EDUCATION  CAMPAIGN  ON  THE  RANKED  CHOICE
 VOTING  SYSTEM  TO  FAMILIARIZE VOTERS WITH THE BALLOT DESIGN, METHOD OF
 VOTING, AND ADVANTAGES OF DETERMINING A  MAJORITY  WINNER  IN  A  SINGLE
 ELECTION.  THE GOVERNING BODY SHALL USE PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENTS, AS
 WELL AS SEEK OTHER MEDIA COOPERATION TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE.
  § 18-112. CONSTRUCTION. ALL STATE AND  LOCAL  ELECTIONS  HELD  BY  THE
 RANKED CHOICE VOTING METHOD PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE SHALL BE SUBJECT TO
 ALL  THE  OTHER PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER AND ALL OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS
 RELATING TO ELECTIONS, SO FAR AS IS APPLICABLE AND NOT INCONSISTENT WITH
 THIS CHAPTER.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately and  shall  apply  to  all
 elections held in the state on or after January 1, 2025.