# Prohibits certain COVID-19 mask and face covering mandates by state agencies

**Bill ID:** A4368
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Chris Tague
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4368 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4368)

## Summary

Prohibits state agencies from promulgating rules, regulations or any form of guidance requiring individuals under the age of eighteen who are not exhibiting COVID-19 related symptoms, as defined by the centers for disease control and prevention, to wear a mask or face covering in a public place or while participating in any recreational or organized sporting activity.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4368
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. TAGUE, MANKTELOW, DURSO, PALMESANO, BRABENEC,
  HAWLEY, SMULLEN, DeSTEFANO, GALLAHAN, WOERNER, LEMONDES --  read  once
  and referred to the Committee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the executive law, in relation to prohibiting certain
  COVID-19 mask and face covering mandates by state agencies

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The executive law is amended by adding a new section 170-g
 to read as follows:
  ยง 170-G. COVID-19 MASK AND FACE COVERING MANDATE. 1. NO  STATE  AGENCY
 SHALL  PROMULGATE  RULES,  REGULATIONS OR ANY FORM OF GUIDANCE REQUIRING
 INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN WHO ARE  NOT  EXHIBITING  COVID-19
 RELATED  SYMPTOMS,  AS  DEFINED  BY  THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
 PREVENTION, TO WEAR A MASK OR FACE COVERING IN A PUBLIC PLACE  OR  WHILE
 PARTICIPATING IN ANY RECREATIONAL OR ORGANIZED SPORTING ACTIVITY.
  2. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION:
  (A)  "STATE  AGENCY"  SHALL  MEAN  ANY  EXECUTIVE  DEPARTMENT, BUREAU,
 COMMISSION, AGENCY, BOARD OR OTHER AGENCY, ANY PUBLIC AUTHORITY, AND THE
 JUDICIARY AND THE LEGISLATURE.
  (B) "FACE-COVERING" SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, CLOTH MASKS,
 SURGICAL MASKS OR N95 RESPIRATORS.
  (C) "PUBLIC PLACE" SHALL NOT INCLUDE FACILITIES  ESTABLISHED  PURSUANT
 TO  ARTICLE TWENTY-EIGHT OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH LAW OR PRIVATE HEALTH CARE
 FACILITIES.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05644-01-3