# Removes restrictions on crossbow size and draw weight when used for hunting

**Bill ID:** A4372
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Philip Palmesano
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4372 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4372)

## Summary

Removes restrictions on crossbow size and draw weight when used for hunting.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4372
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  PALMESANO  --  read once and referred to the
  Committee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN ACT to amend the  environmental  conservation  law,  in  relation  to
  removing  restrictions  on crossbow size and draw weight when used for
  hunting

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Subparagraph 9 of paragraph b of subdivision 4 of section
 11-0901 of the environmental conservation law, as added by section 6  of
 part  EE  of  chapter  55  of  the  laws  of 2014, is amended to read as
 follows:
  (9) with a crossbow unless [such crossbow shall consist of a  bow  and
 string,  either  compound  or  recurve, that launches a minimum fourteen
 inch bolt, not including point, mounted upon a stock with a trigger that
 holds the string and limbs under tension until released. The] THE  trig-
 ger unit of such crossbow [must have] HAS a working safety. [The minimum
 limb  width  of  such crossbow shall be seventeen inches, have a minimum
 peak draw weight of one hundred pounds and a maximum peak draw weight of
 two hundred pounds. The minimum overall length  of  such  crossbow  from
 buttstock to front of limbs shall be twenty-four inches.]
  ยง 2. Subparagraph 9 of paragraph c of subdivision 4 of section 11-0901
 of  the environmental conservation law, as added by section 7 of part EE
 of chapter 55 of the laws of 2014, is amended to read as follows:
  (9) with a crossbow unless [such crossbow shall consist of a  bow  and
 string,  either  compound  or  recurve, that launches a minimum fourteen
 inch bolt, not including point, mounted upon a stock with a trigger that
 holds the string and limbs under tension until released. The] THE  trig-
 ger unit of such crossbow [must have] HAS a working safety. [The minimum
 limb  width  of  such crossbow shall be seventeen inches, have a minimum
 peak draw weight of one hundred pounds and a maximum peak draw weight of
 two hundred pounds. The minimum overall length  of  such  crossbow  from
 buttstock to front of limbs shall be twenty-four inches.]
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05438-01-3