# Increases the per student rate of empire state after school program grants

**Bill ID:** A4382A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew Hevesi
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4382A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4382A)

## Summary

Increases the per student rate of empire state after school program and advantage after school program grants; requires future per student rates to be modified accounting for any minimum wage adjustments.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4382
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. HEVESI, MEEKS -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law, in relation  to  increasing  the  per
  student rate of empire state after school program grants
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The executive law is amended by adding a new section  501-i
 to read as follows:
  ยง  501-I. EMPIRE STATE AFTER SCHOOL PROGRAM GRANTS. EMPIRE STATE AFTER
 SCHOOL PROGRAM GRANTS AWARDED ON OR AFTER  AUGUST  FIRST,  TWO  THOUSAND
 TWENTY-THREE  SHALL  BE PROVIDED AT A RATE OF NO LESS THAN FOUR THOUSAND
 THREE  HUNDRED  DOLLARS  PER  APPROVED  STUDENT.  THE  COMMISSIONER,  IN
 CONJUNCTION  WITH THE DIRECTOR OF THE BUDGET, SHALL, UPON THE COMPLETION
 OF THE FULL TERM OF THE EMPIRE STATE AFTER SCHOOL  PROGRAM,  MODIFY  THE
 AMOUNT  OF MONEY PER APPROVED STUDENT TO BE AWARDED TO GRANT APPLICANTS.
 SUCH MODIFICATION SHALL ACCOUNT FOR ANY MINIMUM  WAGE  ADJUSTMENTS.  THE
 COMMISSIONER  SHALL  PROMULGATE  ANY  RULES  OR REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO
 ENSURE GRANTEES SHALL SERVE AT LEAST THE SAME NUMBER OF STUDENTS IN  ANY
 YEAR THAT THE RATE PER APPROVED STUDENT INCREASES.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05056-02-3