# Provides a tax credit for the cost of fishing and hunting licenses issued to volunteer firefighters and ambulance workers

**Bill ID:** A4385
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Aileen Gunther
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4385 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4385)

## Summary

Provides a tax credit for the cost of fishing and hunting licenses issued to volunteer firefighters and ambulance workers.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4385
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. GUNTHER, STECK, NORRIS, TAGUE, BUTTENSCHON --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN ACT to amend the tax law, in relation to a  credit  for  hunting  and
  fishing  license  fees  for volunteer firefighters and volunteer ambu-
  lance workers

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  606  of the tax law is amended by adding a new
 subsection (e-3) to read as follows:
  (E-3) VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS' AND AMBULANCE WORKERS' HUNTING AND FISH-
 ING LICENSE FEE CREDIT. (1) ALLOWANCE AND AMOUNT OF CREDIT.  A  RESIDENT
 TAXPAYER  WHO  SERVES  AS  AN ACTIVE VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER AS DEFINED IN
 SUBDIVISION ONE OF SECTION TWO HUNDRED FIFTEEN OF THE GENERAL  MUNICIPAL
 LAW  OR  AS A VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE WORKER AS DEFINED IN SUBDIVISION FOUR-
 TEEN OF SECTION TWO HUNDRED NINETEEN-K OF THE GENERAL MUNICIPAL LAW, AND
 WHO HAS SERVED AS SUCH FOR THE PREVIOUS TWELVE CONSECUTIVE  MONTHS,  MAY
 CLAIM A TAX CREDIT AGAINST THE TAX IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE IN THE AMOUNT
 OF  ANY  FEES PAID FOR HUNTING AND/OR FISHING LICENSES, PRIVILEGES, TAGS
 AND PERMITS ISSUED PURSUANT TO TITLE SEVEN  OF  ARTICLE  ELEVEN  OF  THE
 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION LAW. IN ORDER TO RECEIVE THIS CREDIT A VOLUN-
 TEER FIREFIGHTER OR VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE WORKER MUST HAVE BEEN ACTIVE FOR
 THE ENTIRE TAXABLE YEAR FOR WHICH THE CREDIT IS SOUGHT.
  (2)  APPLICATION  OF  CREDIT. IF THE AMOUNT OF THE CREDIT SHALL EXCEED
 THE TAXPAYER'S TAX FOR SUCH YEAR THE EXCESS SHALL BE CARRIED OVER TO THE
 FOLLOWING YEAR OR YEARS, AND MAY BE DEDUCTED FROM THE TAXPAYER'S TAX FOR
 SUCH YEAR OR YEARS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately and shall apply to taxable
 years beginning on and after January 1, 2024.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09045-01-3