# Relates to the appointment of commissioners of elections

**Bill ID:** A4463
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** J. Gary Pretlow
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4463 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4463)

## Summary

Relates to the appointment of commissioners of elections; provides that once a party recommends a person for commissioner of elections the local legislative body shall automatically approve the appointment of such person.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4463
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. PRETLOW -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Election Law
 
 AN ACT to amend the election law, in  relation  to  the  appointment  of
  commissioners of elections
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Subdivision 4 of section 3-204  of  the  election  law,  as
 amended  by  chapter  116  of  the  laws  of 2010, is amended to read as
 follows:
  4. Commissioners of [election] ELECTIONS shall  be  appointed  by  the
 county  legislative  body, or in the city of New York, by the city coun-
 cil.  Provided, however, that [if a  legislative  body  shall  fail  to
 appoint  any  person recommended by a party for appointment as a commis-
 sioner pursuant to this section, within thirty days after the filing  of
 a  certificate  of  recommendation  with such legislative body, then the
 members of such legislative body who are members of the political  party
 which  filed  such  certificate  may  appoint  such  person. And further
 provided, if there are no  members  of  the  legislative  body  who  are
 members  of  the  political  party  which  filed  such  certificate, the
 appointment shall take effect upon the expiration of  thirty  days  from
 the date that the certificate was filed. If none of the persons named in
 any  of  the certificates filed by a party are so appointed within sixty
 days after the filing of any such certificate, then such party may  file
 another  certificate within thirty days after the expiration of any such
 sixty day period recommending a different person for  such  appointment.
 If  a  party  fails  to file a certificate within the time prescribed by
 this section, the members of the legislative body  who  are  members  of
 such  party may appoint any eligible person to such office] THE LEGISLA-
 TIVE BODY SHALL AUTOMATICALLY APPROVE ANY  RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR  COMMIS-
 SIONERS OF ELECTIONS BY A PARTY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09349-01-3