# Prohibits foreign agents from holding public office and political party positions

**Bill ID:** A4492
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Philip Ramos
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4492 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4492)

## Summary

Prohibits persons who are or have ever been foreign agents from holding public office and political party positions; defines "foreign agent".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4492
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  RAMOS,  COOK, TAYLOR, STERN, HEVESI, SAYEGH,
  STIRPE, SIMON, WALLACE, GLICK, BUTTENSCHON -- read once  and  referred
  to the Committee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  public  officers  law  and the election law, in
  relation to prohibiting foreign agents from holding public office  and
  political party positions
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 3 of the public officers law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 1-b to read as follows:
  1-B. NO PERSON SHALL BE CAPABLE OF HOLDING A CIVIL OFFICE WHO SHALL BE
 OR WHO HAS EVER BEEN A FOREIGN AGENT.  FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SUBDIVI-
 SION, THE TERM "FOREIGN AGENT" MEANS A PERSON WHO  ACTS  AT  THE  ORDER,
 REQUEST,  OR  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OR CONTROL OF A FOREIGN GOVERNMENT,
 ORGANIZATION OR PERSON OUTSIDE OF THE UNITED STATES OR PERSONS  WHO  ARE
 CONTROLLED  OR  SUBSIDIZED IN MAJOR PART BY A FOREIGN GOVERNMENT, ORGAN-
 IZATION OR PERSON OUTSIDE OF THE UNITED STATES.
  ยง 2. The election law is amended by adding a new section 2-126 to read
 as follows:
  ยง 2-126. PARTY POSITIONS; PROHIBITED PERSONS. NO PERSON WHO IS OR  HAS
 EVER  BEEN A FOREIGN AGENT SHALL HOLD A PARTY POSITION. FOR THE PURPOSES
 OF THIS SECTION, THE TERM "FOREIGN AGENT" MEANS A PERSON WHO ACTS AT THE
 ORDER, REQUEST, OR UNDER THE DIRECTION OR CONTROL OF A  FOREIGN  GOVERN-
 MENT, ORGANIZATION OR PERSON OUTSIDE OF THE UNITED STATES OR PERSONS WHO
 ARE  CONTROLLED  OR  SUBSIDIZED  IN  MAJOR PART BY A FOREIGN GOVERNMENT,
 ORGANIZATION OR PERSON OUTSIDE OF THE UNITED STATES.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08262-01-3