# Enables persons charged with or convicted of a crime to register to vote and to vote; repeals certain provisions relating to voter challenges at polling places and to notice of voter rights

**Bill ID:** A4499
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Harvey Epstein
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4499 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4499)

## Summary

Enables persons charged with or convicted of a crime to register to vote and to vote; repeals certain provisions relating to voter challenges at polling places and to notice of voter rights.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4499
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. EPSTEIN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Election Law
 
 AN ACT to amend the election law and the correction law, in relation  to
  enabling  persons  charged with or convicted of a crime to register to
  vote and to vote; to amend the New York city charter, in  relation  to
  making conforming changes; to repeal subdivision 5 of section 8-504 of
  the  election  law relating to voter challenges at polling places; and
  to repeal subdivisions 10 of section 1057-a of the New York city char-
  ter relating to notice of voter rights
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The election law is amended by adding a new section 8-409
 to read as follows:
  § 8-409. VOTING BY INCARCERATED PERSONS. 1. ANY PERSON INCARCERATED IN
 A STATE OR LOCAL CORRECTIONAL FACILITY, AS DEFINED IN SECTION TWO OF THE
 CORRECTION LAW, SHALL BE ENTITLED TO VOTE BY ABSENTEE BALLOT AS PROVIDED
 IN SECTION SEVENTY-FIVE OF THE CORRECTION LAW.
  2.  ALL BALLOTS CAST PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION AND SECTION SEVENTY-FIVE
 OF THE CORRECTION LAW SHALL BE CAST IN THE MANNER PROVIDED BY THIS CHAP-
 TER FOR THE CASTING OF ABSENTEE BALLOTS.
  3. ALL BALLOTS CAST PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS  OF  THIS  SECTION  AND
 SECTION  SEVENTY-FIVE  OF  THE CORRECTION LAW WHICH ARE  RECEIVED BEFORE
 THE CLOSE OF THE POLLS ON ELECTION DAY BY THE BOARD OF ELECTIONS CHARGED
 WITH THE  DUTY  OF  CASTING  AND  CANVASSING  SUCH BALLOTS,  MAY  BE
 DELIVERED TO THE INSPECTORS OF ELECTION IN THE MANNER PRESCRIBED BY THIS
 CHAPTER  OR  RETAINED AT THE  BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND CAST AND CANVASSED
 PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 9-209 OF THIS CHAPTER.
  § 2. Section 75 of the correction law, as amended by  chapter  103  of
 the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  §  75. [Notice of voting] VOTING rights. [Prior to the release from a]
 1. UPON THE ADMISSION OF AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL TO A STATE OR  LOCAL
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08655-01-3
 A. 4499  2
 
 correctional  facility [of any person], the department shall notify such
 [person verbally and in writing, that] INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL OF his or
 her voting rights [will be restored upon release and provide such person
 with  a  form  of  application  for voter registration and a declination
 form, offer such person assistance in filling out the appropriate  form,
 and  provide such person written information distributed by the board of
 elections on the importance and the mechanics of voting.  Upon  release,
 such person may choose to either submit his or her completed application
 to the state board or county board where such person resides or have the
 department  transmit  it on his or her behalf. Where such person chooses
 to have the department transmit the application,  the  department  shall
 transmit  the  completed  application  upon such person's release to the
 state board or associated with an absentee ballot without  interference.
 county  board  where such person resides.] AND, UPON THE REQUEST OF SUCH
 INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL, PROVIDE SUCH INDIVIDUAL WITH A FORM OF APPLICA-
 TION FOR VOTER REGISTRATION TOGETHER WITH WRITTEN  INFORMATION  DISTRIB-
 UTED  BY  THE  BOARD  OF  ELECTIONS  ON  THE IMPORTANCE AND MECHANICS OF
 VOTING, OR WITH ACCESS TO THE ELECTRONIC VOTER REGISTRATION  TRANSMITTAL
 SYSTEM DESCRIBED IN TITLE FIVE OF ARTICLE EIGHT OF THE ELECTION LAW. THE
 SUPERINTENDENT OF  THE  CORRECTIONAL  FACILITY  SHALL  ENSURE  THAT  ALL
 COMPLETED VOTER REGISTRATIONS ARE:
  (A)  PROPERLY AND IMMEDIATELY SUBMITTED ELECTRONICALLY TO THE APPLICA-
 BLE BOARD OF ELECTIONS IF THE ELECTRONIC VOTER REGISTRATION  TRANSMITTAL
 SYSTEM IS UTILIZED; OR
  (B)  DEPOSITED WITH THE UNITED STATES POST OFFICE WITHIN THREE DAYS OF
 BEING FILLED OUT  BY  AN  INCARCERATED  INDIVIDUAL  IF  REGISTRATION  IS
 SUBMITTED ON PAPER.
  2.  EACH  INCARCERATED  INDIVIDUAL WHO IS QUALIFIED TO VOTE AND REGIS-
 TERED TO VOTE MAY APPLY TO HIS OR HER COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS  FOR  AN
 ABSENTEE  BALLOT  IN  THE  MANNER PROVIDED FOR BY THE MAIL PROVISIONS OF
 SECTION 8-400 OF THE ELECTION LAW. THERE SHALL  BE  A  PRESUMPTION  THAT
 INCARCERATED  INDIVIDUALS  ARE QUALIFIED TO VOTE AND REGISTERED TO VOTE.
 THE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY SHALL ENSURE  THAT  EACH
 SUCH  APPLICATION  FOR  AN ABSENTEE BALLOT IS  DEPOSITED WITH THE UNITED
 STATES POST OFFICE WITHIN THREE DAYS OF BEING FILLED OUT BY AN INCARCER-
 ATED INDIVIDUAL.
  3. EACH ABSENTEE BALLOT RECEIVED AT THE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY SHALL BE
 DELIVERED TO THE  INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL  TO WHOM IT  IS  ADDRESSED
 WITHIN  TWO  DAYS  OF RECEIPT AT THE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.  THE SUPER-
 INTENDENT OF THE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY SHALL ENSURE THAT  EACH  ABSENTEE
 BALLOT IS DEPOSITED WITH THE UNITED STATES POST OFFICE WITHIN THREE DAYS
 OF  BEING  FILLED OUT BY THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL TO WHOM IT HAS BEEN
 ADDRESSED.
  4. VOTER REGISTRATIONS, APPLICATIONS FOR ABSENTEE BALLOTS AND ABSENTEE
 BALLOTS  SHALL BE PROCESSED BY THE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY SEPARATELY FROM
 OTHER  INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL  MAIL.  NOTWITHSTANDING ANY LAW, RULE  OR
 REGULATION  TO  THE  CONTRARY, NO PERSON SHALL OPEN ANY CORRESPONDENCE
 BETWEEN AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL AND A BOARD OF  ELECTIONS,  INCLUDING
 AN  INCARCERATED  INDIVIDUAL'S  VOTER REGISTRATION, APPLICATION  FOR  AN
 ABSENTEE  BALLOT  OR  FILLED  OUT ABSENTEE BALLOT. INCARCERATED INDIVID-
 UALS  SHALL BE PERMITTED TO CAST THEIR VOTES PRIVATELY AND TO  SEAL  ALL
 ENVELOPES ASSOCIATED WITH AN ABSENTEE BALLOT WITHOUT INTERFERENCE.
  §  3.  Section  5-106  of the election law, subdivisions 2, 3 and 4 as
 amended by chapter 103 of the laws of 2021, subdivision 5 as amended  by
 chapter  234 of the laws of 1976 and subdivision 6 as amended by chapter
 82 of the laws of 1982, is amended to read as follows:
 A. 4499  3

  § 5-106. Qualifications of voters; reasons for exclusion.
  1.  No  person who shall receive, accept, or offer to receive, or pay,
 offer or promise to pay, contribute, offer or promise to  contribute  to
 another,  to be paid or used, any money or any other valuable thing as a
 compensation or reward for the  giving  or  withholding  a  vote  at  an
 election,  or for registering or refraining from registering as a voter,
 or who shall make any promise to influence the giving or withholding  of
 any  such  vote or registration, or who shall make or become directly or
 indirectly interested in any bet or wager depending upon the  result  of
 an election, shall vote at such election.
  2.  [No  person  who has been convicted of a felony and sentenced to a
 period of imprisonment for such felony pursuant  to  the  laws  of  this
 state,  shall  have  the  right  to register for or vote at any election
 while he or she is incarcerated for such felony.
  3. No person who has been convicted in a federal court, of  a  felony,
 or  a crime or offense which would constitute a felony under the laws of
 this state, and sentenced to a period of imprisonment for  such  felony,
 shall have the right to register for or vote at any election while he or
 she is incarcerated for such felony.
  4.  No  person  who has been convicted in another state for a crime or
 offense which would constitute a felony under the laws of this state and
 sentenced to a period of imprisonment for such felony,  shall  have  the
 right  to register for or vote at any election in this state while he or
 she is incarcerated for such felony.
  5. The provisions of subdivisions two, three and four of this  section
 shall  not  apply  if the person so convicted is not sentenced to either
 death or imprisonment, or if the execution of a sentence of imprisonment
 is suspended.
  6.] No person who has been adjudged incompetent by order of a court of
 competent judicial authority shall have the right  to  register  for  or
 vote  at  any  election  in this state unless thereafter he OR SHE shall
 have been adjudged competent pursuant to law.
  § 4. Subdivision 3 of section 5-210 of the election law, as amended by
 chapter 765 of the laws of 2022, is amended to read as follows:
  3.  Completed  application  forms,  when  received  by  any  board  of
 elections  and,  with  respect  to  application forms promulgated by the
 federal election  commission,  when  received  by  the  state  board  of
 elections,  or  showing  a  dated cancellation mark of the United States
 Postal Service or contained in an envelope showing such a dated  cancel-
 lation  mark  which  is not later than the fifteenth day before the next
 ensuing primary, general or special election, and received no later than
 the tenth day before such election, or delivered in person to such board
 of elections not later than the tenth day before  such  election,  shall
 entitle  the  applicant to vote in such election, if he or she is other-
 wise qualified, provided, however, such applicant shall not  vote  on  a
 voting  machine  until  his  or  her  identity is verified. Any board of
 elections receiving an application form  from  a  person  who  does  not
 reside in its jurisdiction but who does reside elsewhere in the state of
 New  York,  shall  forthwith forward such application form to the proper
 board of elections; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT THE RESIDENCE  OF  A  PERSON
 INCARCERATED  IN  A  CORRECTIONAL FACILITY, AS  DEFINED  IN  SECTION TWO
 OF  THE CORRECTION LAW, OR IN A COUNTY JAIL,  IS  NOT  INCLUDED  IN  THE
 JURISDICTION WHERE A PERSON  IS  INCARCERATED  UNLESS  SUCH  PERSON  HAD
 RESIDED IN THAT JURISDICTION PRIOR TO INCARCERATION, AND ANY SUCH PERSON
 MAY  APPLY TO REGISTER TO VOTE IN THE JURISDICTION WHERE THAT PERSON HAS
 PREVIOUSLY ESTABLISHED A FIXED AND PRINCIPAL HOME TO  WHICH  THE  PERSON
 A. 4499  4

 INTENDS  TO RETURN. Each board of elections shall make an entry on each
 such form of the date it is received by such board.
  § 5. Subdivision 1 of section 5-400 of the election law, as amended by
 chapter  659  of the laws of 1994, paragraph (a) as amended by chapter 3
 of the laws of 2019, is amended to read as follows:
  1. A voter's registration, including the registration of  a  voter  in
 inactive  status,  shall  be  cancelled if, since the time of his OR HER
 last registration, he OR SHE:
  (a) Moved his or her residence outside the state.
  (b) [Was convicted of a felony disqualifying him from voting  pursuant
 to the provisions of section 5-106 of this article.
  (c)] Has been adjudicated an incompetent.
  [(d)] (C) Refused to take a challenge oath.
  [(e)] (D) Has died.
  [(f)]  (E)  Did  not  vote  in  any election conducted by the board of
 elections during the period ending with the second general  election  at
 which  candidates  for federal office are on the ballot after his OR HER
 name was placed in inactive status and for whom the board  of  elections
 did  not,  during such period, in any other way, receive any information
 that such voter still resides in the same county or city.
  [(g)] (F) Personally requested to have his OR HER  name  removed  from
 the list of registered voters.
  [(h)]  (G)  For  any  other  reason, is no longer qualified to vote as
 provided in this chapter.
  § 6. Paragraph b of subdivision 4 of section  5-708  of  the  election
 law,  as added by chapter 659 of the laws of 1994, is amended to read as
 follows:
  b.  The  state board shall arrange such notices and the names received
 pursuant to the other provisions of this section by county of  residence
 and  transmit  such  notices [and any notices of conviction for a felony
 received from a United States attorney]  to  the  appropriate  board  of
 elections.
  § 7. Subdivision 3 of section 7-123 of the election law, as amended by
 chapter 104 of the laws of 2010, and the opening paragraph as amended by
 chapter 411 of the laws of 2019, is amended to read as follows:
  3.  There  shall  be three envelopes for each military absentee ballot
 issued when the military voter's preferred method of transmission is  by
 mail:  the  inner  affirmation envelope into which a voter places his or
 her voted ballot, the outer envelope which shall  be  addressed  to  the
 absentee voter, and the mailing envelope which is addressed to the coun-
 ty  board  of  elections.  The board of elections shall furnish an inner
 affirmation envelope with each military ballot upon which envelope shall
 be printed:
 
  BALLOT FOR MILITARY VOTER
  AFFIRMATION
 
  I swear or affirm that:
  (a) I am a member of the uniformed  services  or  merchant  marine  on
 active  duty or an eligible spouse, parent, child or dependent of such a
 member, and
  (b) I am a United States citizen, at least eighteen years of  age  (or
 will  be  by the day of the election), eligible to vote in the requested
 jurisdiction, and
 A. 4499  5

  (c) I have [neither been convicted of a felony or other  disqualifying
 offense  nor]  NOT  been  adjudicated mentally incompetent, or if so, my
 voting rights have been reinstated, and
  (d)  I am not registering, requesting a ballot, or voting in any other
 jurisdiction in the United States, and
  (e) My signature and date below indicate when I completed  this  docu-
 ment, and
  (f)  The  information on this form is true and complete to the best of
 my knowledge.
  I understand that a material misstatement of fact in the completion of
 this document may constitute grounds for conviction of a crime.
 
 Date .......... 20....
  ................................
  Signature or mark of voter
  ................................
  Signature of Witness (required
  only if voter does not sign his
  or her own name)
  ................................
  Address of Witness
 
  § 8. Subdivision 2 of section 7-124 of the election law, as amended by
 chapter 104 of the laws of 2010, and the opening and closing  paragraphs
 as  amended  by  chapter  411 of the laws of 2019, is amended to read as
 follows:
  2. There shall be three envelopes for each  special  federal  absentee
 ballot issued by mail: the inner affirmation envelope into which a voter
 places  his  or  her  voted  ballot,  the  outer envelope which shall be
 addressed to the absentee voter,  and  the  mailing  envelope  which  is
 addressed to the county board of elections. The board of elections shall
 furnish  an  inner affirmation envelope with each special federal ballot
 upon which envelope shall be printed:
  I swear or affirm that:
  (a) I am a United States citizen residing outside the  United  States,
 and
  (b)  I am at least eighteen years of age (or will be by the day of the
 election), eligible to vote in the requested jurisdiction, and
  (c) I have [neither been convicted of a felony or other  disqualifying
 offense  nor]  NOT  been  adjudicated mentally incompetent, or if so, my
 voting rights have been reinstated, and
  (d) I am not qualified to register, request a ballot, or vote  in  any
 other jurisdiction in the United States, and
  (e)  My  signature and date below indicate when I completed this docu-
 ment, and
  (f) The information on this form is true and complete to the  best  of
 my knowledge.
  I understand that a material misstatement of fact in the completion of
 this document may constitute grounds for conviction of a crime.
 
 Date.................20.....  .....................................
  Signature or mark of voter
 
  .....................................
  Signature of Witness (required only
  if voter does not sign his or her own
 A. 4499  6
 
  name)
 
  .....................................
  Address of Witness
 
  §  9.  Paragraph (d) of subdivision 1 of section 8-400 of the election
 law, as amended by chapter 63 of the laws of 2010, is amended to read as
 follows:
  (d) absent from his or her voting  residence  because  he  or  she  is
 detained  in  jail awaiting action by a grand jury or awaiting trial, or
 confined in jail or prison after a conviction [for an offense other than
 a felony], provided that he or she is qualified to vote in the  election
 district of his or her residence.
  §  10.  Subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (c) of subdivision 3 of section
 8-400 of the  election law, as amended by chapter 63 of  the  laws  of
 2010, is amended to read as follows:
  (iv)  detained  in  jail  awaiting  action by a grand jury or awaiting
 trial or confined in jail or prison after a conviction [for  an  offense
 other  than  a  felony]  and  stating  the  place  where he or she is so
 detained or confined.
  § 11. Subdivision 5 of section 8-504 of the election law is REPEALED.
  § 12.  Paragraph (d) of subdivision 1 and subparagraph (iv)  of  para-
 graph  (c) of subdivision 4 of section 15-120 of the election law, para-
 graph (d) of subdivision 1 as amended and subparagraph (iv) of paragraph
 (c) of subdivision 4 as added by chapter 289 of the laws  of  2014,  are
 amended to read as follows:
  (d)  absent  from  his  or  her  voting residence because he or she is
 detained in jail awaiting action by a grand jury or awaiting  trial,  or
 confined in jail or prison [after a conviction for an offense other than
 a  felony], provided that he or she is qualified to vote in the election
 district of his or her residence.
  (iv) detained in jail awaiting action by  a  grand  jury  or  awaiting
 trial  or  confined in jail or prison [after a conviction for an offense
 other than a felony] and stating  the  place  where  he  or  she  is  so
 detained or confined.
  §  13.  Subdivisions 10 of section 1057-a of the New York city charter
 are REPEALED.
  § 14. The opening paragraph of section 1057-a of  the  New  York  city
 charter,  as  amended by local law number 80 of the city of New York for
 the year 2020, is amended to read as follows:
  Each agency designated as a participating agency under the  provisions
 of this section shall implement and administer a program of distribution
 of  voter registration forms pursuant to the provisions of this section.
 The following offices  are  hereby  designated  as  participating  voter
 registration  agencies:  The administration for children's services, the
 business integrity commission, the city clerk,  the  civilian  complaint
 review  board,  the  commission  on  human rights, community boards, the
 department of small business services, the department for the aging, the
 department of citywide administrative services, the department  of  city
 planning,  the department of consumer and worker protection, the depart-
 ment of correction, the department of cultural affairs,  the  department
 of  environmental  protection, the department of finance, the department
 of health and mental hygiene, the department of homeless  services,  the
 department  of  housing  preservation and development, the department of
 parks and recreation, the department of  probation,  the  department  of
 records and information services, the taxi and limousine commission, the
 A. 4499  7
 
 department  of  transportation,  the  department  of youth and community
 development, the fire  department,  and  the  human  resources  adminis-
 tration.  Participating  agencies  shall include a mandate in all new or
 renewed agreements with those subcontractors having regular contact with
 the  public  in the daily administration of their business to follow the
 guidelines  of  this  section.  Such  participating  agencies  shall  be
 required  to offer voter registration forms to all persons together with
 written  applications  for  services,  renewal  or  recertification  for
 services  and  change  of address relating to such services, in the same
 language as such application,  renewal,  recertification  or  change  of
 address form where practicable; provided however that this section shall
 not  apply to services that must be provided to prevent actual or poten-
 tial danger to the life, health, or safety of any individual or  of  the
 public. Such agencies shall provide assistance to applicants in complet-
 ing voter registration forms, including the section of the form allowing
 for registration to become an organ donor, and in cases in which such an
 agency  would  provide  assistance  with its own form, such agency shall
 provide the same degree of assistance with regard to the voter registra-
 tion and organ donor forms as is provided with regard to the  completion
 of  its  own  form,  if  so requested. [As part of such assistance, such
 agencies shall also, upon request by an applicant who identifies himself
 or herself as being on  parole  and  when  practically  feasible,  check
 publicly available information to inform such applicant if a restoration
 of  their  right to vote has been granted, provided that such assistance
 may be provided by a person other than the person to  whom  the  request
 was  made and further provided that such assistance shall not be consid-
 ered an endorsement of the accuracy of any publicly  available  informa-
 tion  not  maintained by the city.] Such agencies shall also receive and
 transmit the completed application form from any applicants who  request
 to  have such form transmitted to the board of elections for the city of
 New York.
  § 15. The state board of elections is directed to revise all paperwork
 utilized for voter registration, and for the process of applying for and
 voting by absentee ballot to remove all references to  felonies  or  the
 limitation of the right to vote due to conviction of a felony.
  § 16. This act shall take effect on the first of January next succeed-
 ing the date on which it shall have become a law. Effective immediately,
 the  addition,  amendment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation neces-
 sary for the implementation of  this  act  on  its  effective  date  are
 authorized to be made and completed on or before such date.