# Includes lakes in adopt-a-municipal park, shoreline or roadway programs

**Bill ID:** A4563
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Albert A. Stirpe
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A4563 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4563)

## Summary

Includes lakes in adopt-a-municipal park, shoreline or roadway programs.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4563
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  STIRPE,  McMAHON,  STECK,  BRONSON, LUPARDO,
  GUNTHER, DARLING, OTIS -- read once and referred to the  Committee  on
  Local Governments
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  general municipal law, in relation to including
  lakes in adopt-a-municipal park, shoreline or roadway programs

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  The article heading of article 13-BB of the general munic-
 ipal  law,  as  added  by chapter 626 of the laws of 1991, is amended to
 read as follows:
  ADOPT-A-MUNICIPAL PARK, SHORELINE [OR], ROADWAY
  OR LAKE PROGRAMS
  ยง 2.  Section 277 of the general municipal law, as  added  by  chapter
 626 of the laws of 1991, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง  277.  Adopt-a-municipal  park,  shoreline  [or],  roadway  OR  LAKE
 programs. 1. The governing body of any county, city, town or village  is
 hereby  authorized  and  empowered  to  authorize and direct such of its
 officers or agencies as it shall designate to enter into  [adopt-a-park]
 ADOPT-A-MUNICIPAL  PARK,  shoreline [or], roadway OR LAKE program agree-
 ments with volunteers or groups in an effort to reduce and remove litter
 from ITS MUNICIPAL parks, shorelines, roadways, LAKES and  other  public
 lands. Such agreements shall include but not be limited to:
  a.  providing  and  coordinating  services  by volunteers or groups to
 reduce the amount of litter including providing trash bags and trash bag
 pick up and in designated areas where volunteers may be in close proxim-
 ity to moving vehicles providing safety briefings and reflective  safety
 gear; and
  b.  providing  and  installing  signs  identifying those volunteers or
 groups adopting ITS particular MUNICIPAL  parks,  shorelines,  roadways,
 LAKES or other sections of public land.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00195-01-3
 A. 4563  2
 
  2.  Notwithstanding  any  inconsistent  provision  of law, the county,
 city, town or village and its employees shall not be liable for  damages
 suffered by any persons resulting from the actions or activities of such
 volunteers or groups.
  ยง  3.  This  act  shall take effect on the sixtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.