# Directs the department of public service to prepare a written report on the affordability of water services for commercial and residential customers

**Bill ID:** A4573AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kenneth Zebrowski
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [A4573AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4573AA)

## Summary

Directs the department of public service to prepare a written report on the affordability of water services for commercial and residential customers within 180 days of effectiveness; requires an updated report to be submitted one year after the initial report.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4573--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. ZEBROWSKI, L. ROSENTHAL, THIELE, STECK, COLTON,
  REYES, SIMONE -- read once and referred to  the  Committee  on  Corpo-
  rations,  Authorities  and Commissions -- recommitted to the Committee
  on Corporations, Authorities and Commissions in accordance with Assem-
  bly Rule 3, sec. 2 --  committee  discharged,  bill  amended,  ordered
  reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN  ACT  directing the department of public service to prepare a written
  report on the affordability of water services for commercial and resi-
  dential customers
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  1. As used in this act:
  a.  "Assistance  program"  shall  mean any program offered to eligible
 low-income customers to assist with the costs of electricity,  gas,  and
 water,  including  but not limited to the low-income home energy assist-
 ance program, any low-income affordability plans as provided  by  public
 service  commission  case  number  14-M-0565, and/or any other financial
 assistance program provided through or by New York state  or  individual
 utilities, counties or municipalities.
  b. "Commission" shall mean the public service commission.
  c. "Municipality" shall mean potable water districts and potable water
 systems  owned  and/or  operated  by a city, town, village, authority or
 other governmental subdivision.
  d. "Water-works corporation" shall have the same meaning  as  subdivi-
 sion 27 of section 2 of the public service law, or a municipality.
  2.  a.  Every water-work corporation shall be subject to the jurisdic-
 tion of the public service commission for the purposes of enforcing  the
 provisions  of this act pursuant to sections 24, 25 and 26 of the public
 service law. The commission  shall  adjudicate  complaints  and  conduct
 investigations  for  violation of this act in the manner provided by the
 provisions of article 2 of the public service law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01633-02-4
 A. 4573--A  2
 
  b. Within 180 days after the effective date of this act,  the  commis-
 sion  shall  prepare  and  submit  to the governor and the legislature a
 written report that shall make findings and  recommendations  concerning
 the  affordability  of  water  services  to  commercial  and residential
 customers  in  this state. An updated report shall be submitted one year
 after the commission has submitted such initial report to  the  governor
 and  legislature.  Without  unreasonably  exposing consumer personally
 identifiable information in a manner that violates  public  service  law
 and public service commission practice or federal law, the reports shall
 include  but not be limited to the following, with all information to be
 broken down by water-work corporation, type of service provided,  month,
 customer class, and county:
  (1)  the  number  of  disconnection  notices  sent due to non-payment,
 disconnections due to non-payment, and reconnections of  customers  that
 were disconnected for non-payment;
  (2) the number of liens on real property placed, sold, or enforced due
 to  non-payment,  and  how those numbers compare to the previous year on
 the same month and day, if applicable;
  (3) the number of customers in arrears greater than 60 days at the end
 of each month, and the total dollar amount of arrears;
  (4) the number of customers enrolled in deferred payment agreements at
 the end of each month;
  (5) the number of customers that entered into, successfully completed,
 or defaulted from a deferred payment agreement, and  how  those  numbers
 compare to the previous year on the same month and day;
  (6) the number of customers receiving assistance under each assistance
 program  at the end of each month, the total dollar amount of assistance
 provided for arrears, the total dollar amount of assistance provided for
 current or future bills and the average amount  per  customer,  and  how
 those  numbers  compare  to the previous year on the same month and day;
 and
  (7) the commission's assessment of whether existing  customer  assist-
 ance programs are presently and will in the future be sufficient to meet
 the  financial  needs  of customer accounts in arrears who are unable to
 pay those arrears in full, as well as the needs of customer accounts who
 may be unable to pay bills for current service.
  c. Following the commission's submission of the reports to the  gover-
 nor  and  legislature  such  reports shall be posted on the commission's
 website and be subject to 30 days of  public  comment  on  affordability
 from the date of the submission to the governor and the legislature. The
 commission  shall  provide meaningful  opportunities for  public comment
 from  all  persons who will be impacted by findings of  the  commission,
 including  persons  living  in  disadvantaged communities and in rural
 communities across  the  state  in  entirety.  Within  90  days  of  the
 submission  of the initial report, the commission shall conduct at least
 five public  hearings in different regions of the state,  as  defined
 by  the  empire  state development corporation, and provide meaningful
 opportunity for comment. The public hearings may be held virtually.
  d. Each water-work corporation shall, within 90 days of the  effective
 date  of this act, submit to the commission, in a form and manner deter-
 mined by the commission, the information required pursuant to  paragraph
 b  of  this subdivision.  Six months after the submission of the initial
 report to the governor  and  legislature,  each  water-work  corporation
 shall  submit  to the commission, in a form and manner determined by the
 commission, the information required pursuant to  paragraph  b  of  this
 subdivision.  Each  water-work  corporation shall publish on its website
 A. 4573--A  3
 
 the data it reports pursuant  to  this  paragraph,  simultaneously  with
 submission of the data to the commission.
  3. If the data required by this act cannot reasonably be obtained from
 an existing water-work corporation's information technology system with-
 out  an  increase in customer utility bills, a water-work corporation or
 municipality may petition the commission, in a form  and  manner  to  be
 determined  by the commission, to provide the required data in an alter-
 native format.
  4. The commission shall publish on its website  the  reports  required
 pursuant  to  subdivision  two  of this section, simultaneously with the
 submission of each report.  The reports shall  include  the  information
 required pursuant to this section in a spreadsheet format.
  ยง 2. Severability clause. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivi-
 sion,  section  or  part  of  this act shall be adjudged by any court of
 competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment  shall  not  affect,
 impair,  or  invalidate  the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in
 its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,  subdivision,  section
 or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judg-
 ment shall have been rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
 the  legislature  that  this  act  would  have been enacted even if such
 invalid provisions had not been included herein.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.