# Provides notifications for E-ZPass transactions

**Bill ID:** A4627
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John W. McGowan
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4627 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4627)

## Summary

Provides notifications for E-ZPass transactions that notifies the holder of an E-ZPass that he or she has passed through a toll plaza operated by the New York state thruway authority and a transaction has posted to such holder's account for his or her electronic toll collection device.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4627
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 21, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. MCGOWAN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Corporations, Authorities and Commissions
 
 AN ACT to amend the public authorities law,  in  relation  to  providing
  notifications for E-ZPass transactions
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The public authorities law  is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 378-b to read as follows:
  ยง  378-B.  E-ZPASS  NOTIFICATIONS.  1. THE AUTHORITY SHALL TRANSMIT AN
 ELECTRONIC NOTIFICATION TO THE HOLDER OF AN ELECTRONIC  TOLL  COLLECTION
 DEVICE  THAT  NOTIFIES  SUCH  HOLDER THAT HE OR SHE HAS PASSED THROUGH A
 TOLL PLAZA OPERATED BY THE AUTHORITY AND A  TRANSACTION  HAS  POSTED  TO
 SUCH HOLDER'S ACCOUNT FOR HIS OR HER ELECTRONIC TOLL COLLECTION DEVICE.
  2.  SUCH ELECTRONIC NOTIFICATION SHALL BE PROVIDED BY ELECTRONIC MAIL,
 TEXT MESSAGE OR THROUGH A MOBILE APPLICATION WITHIN TWENTY-FOUR HOURS OF
 A TRANSACTION POSTING TO SUCH HOLDER'S ACCOUNT, OR AS SOON AS  PRACTICA-
 BLE IF NO VALID ACCOUNT IS RECOGNIZED AT THE TIME OF THE TRANSACTION.
  3. A HOLDER OF AN ELECTRONIC TOLL COLLECTION DEVICE MAY:
  (A) OPT OUT OF RECEIVING ELECTRONIC NOTIFICATIONS AT ANY TIME;
  (B) OPT IN TO RECEIVING ELECTRONIC NOTIFICATIONS AT ANY TIME; AND
  (C)  BE  REQUIRED TO CONFIRM PARTICIPATION IN THE ELECTRONIC NOTIFICA-
 TIONS PROGRAM.
  4. THE AUTHORITY SHALL ALLOW  A  PERSON  WITHOUT  AN  ELECTRONIC  TOLL
 COLLECTION DEVICE TO OPT IN TO RECEIVING ELECTRONIC NOTIFICATIONS.
  5.  THE AUTHORITY SHALL PROMULGATE ANY RULES AND NECESSARY REGULATIONS
 TO IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition,  amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation  of  this act on its effective date are authorized to be made and
 completed on or before such date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09385-01-3