# Enacts "Paula's law"

**Bill ID:** A4661
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John W. McGowan
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4661 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4661)

## Summary

Provides that being eighteen years old or more, while in the course of committing rape in the first, second or third degree, criminal sexual act in the first, second or third degree, sexual abuse in the first degree, aggravated sexual abuse in the first, second, third or fourth degree, or incest in the first, second or third degree, against a person less than eighteen years old, he or she intentionally causes the death of such person.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4661
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 21, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. MCGOWAN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to enacting "Paula's law"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Short  title. This act shall be known and may be cited as
 "Paula's law".
  ยง 2. Legislative intent. This act is an  expansion  of  "Joan's  Law",
 enacted  in  2004,  which denies parole in these circumstances for child
 victims under the age of fourteen. This act expands upon "Joan's Law" by
 including child victims under the age of eighteen.
  ยง 3. Subdivision 5 of section 125.25 of the penal law, as  amended  by
 chapter 320 of the laws of 2006, is amended to read as follows:
  5. Being eighteen years old or more, while in the course of committing
 rape  in  the  first, second or third degree, criminal sexual act in the
 first, second or third degree, sexual abuse in the first degree,  aggra-
 vated  sexual  abuse  in  the  first, second, third or fourth degree, or
 incest in the first, second or third degree, against a person less  than
 [fourteen]  EIGHTEEN years old, he or she intentionally causes the death
 of such person.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect on the first of November next succeed-
 ing the date on which it shall have become a law.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09377-01-3