# Relates to the clean-up of petroleum discharges occurring during the delivery of home heating oil to a residence

**Bill ID:** A4677
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** J. Gary Pretlow
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4677 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4677)

## Summary

Relates to the clean-up of petroleum discharges occurring during the delivery of home heating oil to a residence; provides any petroleum discharges shall be immediately cleaned up by the oil delivery company; if such spill affects soil then clean-up shall include replacing affected soil with new soil within 24 hours; provides fines for violation.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4677
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 22, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. PRETLOW -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN ACT to amend the navigation  law,  in  relation  to  the  removal  of
  prohibited discharges
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 176 of the navigation law is amended  by  adding  a
 new subdivision 9 to read as follows:
  9.  ANY  DISCHARGE OF PETROLEUM OCCURRING AT A RESIDENCE IN THE COURSE
 OF THE DELIVERY OF HOME HEATING OIL TO SUCH  RESIDENCE  FOR  RESIDENTIAL
 USE  SHALL BE IMMEDIATELY CLEANED UP BY THE OIL DELIVERY COMPANY. IF THE
 SPILL AFFECTS SOIL THE CLEAN UP SHALL  INCLUDE  REPLACING  THE  AFFECTED
 SOIL  WITH  NEW SOIL, WHICH SHALL BE COMPLETED WITHIN TWENTY-FOUR HOURS.
 VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION SHALL RESULT IN A FINE OF FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS
 FOR THE FIRST OFFENSE AND  ONE  THOUSAND  DOLLARS  FOR  EACH  ADDITIONAL
 OFFENSE,  NOT TO EXCEED TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS PAYABLE BY THE OIL DELIVERY
 COMPANY. SUCH FINE SHALL BE IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER PENALTY AS PROVIDED
 FOR IN THIS ARTICLE. NOTHING CONTAINED  IN  THIS  SUBDIVISION  SHALL  BE
 INTERPRETED TO DIMINISH LIABILITY ESTABLISHED IN THIS ARTICLE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09474-01-3