# Requires weapons and ammunition to be secured when being transported and imposes a fine of at least $1,000 for violation

**Bill ID:** A4684
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** J. Gary Pretlow
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4684 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4684)

## Summary

Requires all motor vehicles transporting five or more weapons or ammunition for five or more weapons to have a separate storage area secured by padlock or combination lock and all such weapons and ammunition to be so secured when being transported and imposes a fine of at least $1,000 and not more than $5,000 for violation.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4684
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 22, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. PRETLOW -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation to  the  trans-
  portation of weapons and ammunition
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The vehicle and traffic law is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 379 to read as follows:
  ยง  379.  SAFETY  REQUIREMENTS  FOR VEHICLE TRANSPORTING WEAPONS AND/OR
 AMMUNITION. 1. ALL MOTOR VEHICLES USED TO TRANSPORT FIVE OR MORE WEAPONS
 OF ANY TYPE, AND AMMUNITION SUFFICIENT FOR FIVE OR  MORE  WEAPONS  SHALL
 HAVE  A  SEPARATE  STORAGE AREA SECURED BY A PADLOCK OR COMBINATION LOCK
 AND ACCESSIBLE ONLY BY REMOVING  SUCH  LOCK,  WHICH  SHALL  BE  OF  SUCH
 STRENGTH  TO  RESIST BEING CUT BY ANY READILY AVAILABLE TOOL. AT NO TIME
 SHALL AMMUNITION AND WEAPONS BE SECURED IN THE SAME STORAGE AREA.
  2. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL HAVE THE POWER TO PROMULGATE RULES AND REGU-
 LATIONS RELATING TO THE  TRANSPORTATION  OF  WEAPONS  AND/OR  AMMUNITION
 CONSISTENT WITH THIS SECTION.
  3.  THE  TRANSPORTATION OF WEAPONS AND/OR AMMUNITION NOT IN COMPLIANCE
 WITH THIS SECTION OR THE RULES AND REGULATIONS PROMULGATED  PURSUANT  TO
 THIS  SECTION  SHALL  BE  PUNISHABLE  BY A FINE OF AT LEAST ONE THOUSAND
 DOLLARS AND NOT MORE THAN FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR EACH VIOLATION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the first of November next succeed-
 ing the date on which it shall have become a law.  Effective  immediate-
 ly,  the  addition,  amendment  and/or  repeal of any rule or regulation
 necessary for the implementation of this act on its effective  date  are
 authorized to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09484-01-3