# Requires that bus drivers be provided with regular rest periods to have the opportunity to use a restroom

**Bill ID:** A4691
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** J. Gary Pretlow
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4691 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4691)

## Summary

Requires that bus drivers be provided with regular rest periods to have the opportunity to use a restroom.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4691
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 22, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. PRETLOW -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the transportation law, in  relation  to  providing  bus
  drivers with appropriate rest periods
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Short title. This act shall be known and may  be  cited  as
 the "public transit safety act".
  ยง  2.  The transportation law is amended by adding a new section 211-a
 to read as follows:
  ยง 211-A. APPROPRIATE REST PERIODS FOR BUS DRIVERS. 1. AS USED IN  THIS
 SECTION:
  A.  "APPROPRIATE  REST PERIOD" MEANS A PERIOD OF REST OF NOT LESS THAN
 TEN MINUTES FOR EVERY SEGMENT OF FOUR HOURS OR MAJOR PART THEREOF WORKED
 IN ONE WORK PERIOD WITHOUT DEDUCTION FOR THE EMPLOYEE'S PAY.
  B. "BUS" MEANS EVERY MOTOR VEHICLE HAVING A SEATING CAPACITY  OF  NINE
 OR  MORE PASSENGERS IN ADDITION TO THE DRIVER AND USED FOR THE TRANSPOR-
 TATION OF PERSONS.
  C. "BUS DRIVER" MEANS ANY  PERSON  EMPLOYED  BY  ANY  TRANSIT  AGENCY,
 AUTHORITY  OR  COMPANY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE, WHOSE OPERATION IS AUTHORIZED
 BY THE STATE OR ANY OF ITS POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS, THAT DRIVES A BUS FOR
 HIRE OR PROFIT.
  D. "TRANSPORTATION PROVIDER" MEANS ANY PUBLIC, PRIVATE OR NOT-FOR-PRO-
 FIT ENTITY, INCLUDING ANY  TRANSPORTATION  AUTHORITY,  UTILIZING  PUBLIC
 FUNDS  TO PROVIDE OR CONTRACT FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SERVICES FOR THE
 BENEFIT OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC OR SPECIFIC CLIENT GROUPS.
  2. A. EVERY TRANSPORTATION PROVIDER SHALL PROVIDE EACH BUS  DRIVER  AN
 APPROPRIATE REST PERIOD TO UTILIZE THE NEAREST CONVENIENT RESTROOM.
  B.  NO PROVISION OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE DEEMED TO PROHIBIT EMPLOYERS
 AND EMPLOYEES FROM ESTABLISHING APPROPRIATE REST  PERIODS  WHICH  DIFFER
 FROM  THOSE REQUIRED BY THIS SECTION PURSUANT TO A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
 AGREEMENT.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09447-01-3