# Requires air quality monitoring of certain major mass transportation projects that involve an excavation operation within N.Y. city

**Bill ID:** A4762
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Harvey Epstein
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4762 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4762)

## Summary

Requires air quality monitoring of certain major mass transportation projects that involve an excavation operation within a city having a population of one million or more.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4762
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. EPSTEIN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN ACT to amend the  environmental  conservation  law,  in  relation  to
  requiring air quality monitoring for certain major mass transportation
  projects
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The environmental conservation law is amended by  adding  a
 new section 19-0322 to read as follows:
 ยง 19-0322. AIR QUALITY MONITORING REQUIRED FOR MAJOR MASS TRANSPORTATION
  PROJECTS.
  1.  FOR  PURPOSES  OF THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE
 FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  (A) "MAJOR MASS TRANSPORTATION  PROJECT"  MEANS  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OR
 RECONSTRUCTION OF ANY RAPID TRANSIT, RAILROAD, OMNIBUS, MARINE TRANSPOR-
 TATION OR OTHER MASS TRANSPORTATION FACILITY WITH A COST OF SEVENTY-FIVE
 MILLION OR MORE DOLLARS.
  (B) "EXCAVATION" MEANS THE MOVEMENT OR REMOVAL OF EARTH, ROCK OR OTHER
 MATERIALS  IN  OR  ON  THE  GROUND  BY USE OF MECHANIZED EQUIPMENT OR BY
 BLASTING, AND INCLUDES, BUT IS NOT LIMITED  TO,  AUGURING,  BACKFILLING,
 BORING, DRILLING, GRADING, PLOWING IN, PULLING IN, TRENCHING AND TUNNEL-
 ING;  PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT THE MOVEMENT OF EARTH BY TOOLS MANIPULATED
 ONLY BY HUMAN OR ANIMAL POWER AND THE TILLING OF SOIL  FOR  AGRICULTURAL
 PURPOSES SHALL NOT BE DEEMED EXCAVATION.
  2.  THE  DEPARTMENT  SHALL CONDUCT AN AIR QUALITY ANALYSIS OF THE AREA
 SURROUNDING THE EXCAVATION OF  ANY  MAJOR  MASS  TRANSPORTATION  PROJECT
 WITHIN A CITY HAVING A POPULATION OF ONE MILLION OR MORE, WHICH ANALYSIS
 SHALL,  BE  CONDUCTED IN A MANNER THAT IS PROTECTIVE OF HUMAN HEALTH AND
 AT A MINIMUM INCLUDE, FEDERAL CRITERIA POLLUTANTS INCLUDING  PARTICULATE
 MATTER OF 2.5 MICRONS OR SMALLER AND OTHER EMISSIONS AS THE COMMISSIONER
 MAY SPECIFY.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04317-01-3
 A. 4762  2
 
  3.  ONCE  COMPLETED,  THE  DEPARTMENT  SHALL MAKE ALL SUCH AIR QUALITY
 ANALYSIS, INCLUDING RAW DATA AND REPORTS AVAILABLE ON ITS WEBSITE WITHIN
 NINETY DAYS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law.