# Designates the tenth day of March of each year as a public holiday, to be known as Harriet Tubman day

**Bill ID:** A4783
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** J. Gary Pretlow
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4783 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4783)

## Summary

Designates the tenth day of March of each year as a public holiday, to be known as Harriet Tubman day.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4783
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. PRETLOW -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the general construction law, in relation to the  desig-
  nation of Harriet Tubman day
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 24 of the general construction law, as  amended  by
 chapter 249 of the laws of 2020, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 24. Public holidays; half-holidays. The term public holiday includes
 the  following days in each year: the first day of January, known as New
 Year's day; the third Monday of January,  known  as  Dr.  Martin  Luther
 King, Jr. day; the twelfth day of February, known as Lincoln's birthday;
 the  third Monday in February, known as Washington's birthday; THE TENTH
 DAY OF MARCH, KNOWN AS HARRIET TUBMAN DAY; the last Monday in May, known
 as Memorial day; the second Sunday in June, known as Flag day; the nine-
 teenth day of June, known as Juneteenth; the fourth day of  July,  known
 as  Independence day; the first Monday in September, known as Labor day;
 the second Monday in October, known as Columbus day; the eleventh day of
 November, known as Veterans' day; the fourth Thursday in November, known
 as Thanksgiving day; and the twenty-fifth  day  of  December,  known  as
 Christmas  day,  and  if any of such days except Flag day is Sunday, the
 next day thereafter; each general election day, and each  day  appointed
 by  the  president of the United States or by the governor of this state
 as a day of general thanksgiving, general fasting and prayer,  or  other
 general religious observances. The term half-holiday includes the period
 from noon to midnight of each Saturday which is not a public holiday.
  ยง  2. This act shall take effect on the first of January next succeed-
 ing the date on which it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03298-01-3