# Relates to police staffing at certain parks

**Bill ID:** A4837
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Philip Ramos
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4837 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4837)

## Summary

Relates to police staffing at certain parks; bases the number of officers deployed to regions upon a percentage of the region's park attendance average.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4837
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. RAMOS -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Tourism, Parks, Arts and Sports Development
 
 AN ACT to amend the parks, recreation and historic preservation law,  in
  relation to police staffing at certain parks
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 3.07 of the parks, recreation and historic  preser-
 vation  law  is  amended  by adding three new subdivisions 3, 4 and 5 to
 read as follows:
  3. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL PROVIDE FOR THE HEALTH, SAFETY  AND  WELFARE
 OF  THE  PUBLIC  USING  FACILITIES  UNDER  ITS JURISDICTION, WHICH SHALL
 INCLUDE ENSURING A MINIMUM STAFF OF THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY-FIVE PERMANENT-
 LY APPOINTED, FULL TIME REGIONAL STATE PARK  POLICE  OFFICERS  AT  STATE
 PARKS,  BEACHES,  CAMPGROUNDS,  HISTORIC  SITES AND CONCERT VENUES.  THE
 NUMBER OF REGIONAL STATE PARK POLICE OFFICERS DEPLOYED  TO  EACH  REGION
 SHALL  BE  EQUIVALENT  TO  THE  PERCENTAGE  OF  EACH REGION'S THREE YEAR
 ATTENDANCE AVERAGE.
  4. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL NOT OPEN A  NEW  STATE  PARK,  BEACH,  CAMP-
 GROUND, HISTORIC SITE OR CONCERT VENUE UNLESS IT SUBMITS A STAFFING PLAN
 TO  THE  LEGISLATURE  THAT  DEMONSTRATES THERE IS A SUFFICIENT NUMBER OF
 REGIONAL STATE PARK POLICE TO PROVIDE ADEQUATE AND APPROPRIATE  DELIVERY
 OF POLICE SERVICES TO PATRONS VISITING THE NEW SITE.
  5.  THE  COMMISSIONER MAY REDEPLOY REGIONAL STATE PARK POLICE OFFICERS
 OUTSIDE OF THEIR ASSIGNED REGION IN THE CASE OF AN EMERGENCY.  EMERGEN-
 CIES  ARE  DEFINED  AS  NATURAL DISASTERS, DECLARED EMERGENCIES AND MASS
 CASUALTY INCIDENTS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect one year after it shall have become  a
 law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08281-01-3