# Requires landowners to be notified of a petroleum discharge

**Bill ID:** A4872
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Anna Kelles
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4872 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4872)

## Summary

Provides that upon notification of a petroleum discharge, the department of environmental conservation shall notify the municipal chief executive and landowners or tenants adjacent to or neighboring the site of the discharge whose property or drinking water supply may be potentially impacted by such discharge.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4872
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 24, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. KELLES -- Multi-Sponsored by -- M. of A. COLTON
  -- read once and referred to the Committee on Environmental  Conserva-
  tion
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  navigation  law, in relation to notification of
  petroleum discharge
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 175 of the navigation law, as amended by chapter 35
 of the laws of 1985, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง  175.  Notification  by  persons  responsible  for discharge. 1. Any
 person responsible for causing a discharge shall immediately notify  the
 department  pursuant to rules and regulations established by the depart-
 ment, but in no case later than two hours after the  discharge.  Failure
 to  so  notify  shall  make  persons liable to the penalty provisions of
 section [192] ONE HUNDRED NINETY-TWO of this article.  Notwithstanding
 the  provisions  of  any  other law, such notification to the department
 shall be deemed to fulfill the notification requirements  of  any  other
 state or local law.
  2.  UPON  NOTIFICATION  OF A DISCHARGE, PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION ONE OF
 THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT  SHALL  IMMEDIATELY  NOTIFY  THE  MUNICIPAL
 CHIEF  EXECUTIVE,  ALL LANDOWNERS OR TENANTS ADJACENT TO THE SITE OF THE
 DISCHARGE AND/OR ANY NEARBY LANDOWNERS  OR  TENANTS  WHOSE  PROPERTY  OR
 DRINKING WATER SUPPLY MAY BE POTENTIALLY IMPACTED BY SUCH DISCHARGE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09660-01-3