# Requires health care providers and practitioners to provide patients with a list of ingredients contained in vaccines

**Bill ID:** A4900
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** David DiPietro
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4900 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4900)

## Summary

Requires health care providers and practitioners to provide patients with a list of ingredients contained in vaccines, the manufacturer product insert, the vaccines' potential side effects and where to report vaccine-adverse events forty-eight hours prior to immunization.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4900
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 24, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. DiPIETRO -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Health
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the public health law, in relation to requiring health
  care providers and practitioners to provide patients with  a  list  of
  ingredients contained in vaccines

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 2166 of the public health law, as added by  chapter
 573 of the laws of 1999, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง  2166. Immunization; regulations; REQUIREMENTS.  1. The commissioner
 may promulgate regulations with respect to immunization conducted  by  a
 home  care  services  agency  licensed  pursuant  to  section thirty-six
 hundred five of this chapter or certified pursuant to section thirty-six
 hundred eight of this chapter, facilities  or  institutions  established
 under  article  twenty-eight  of  this  chapter,  and  other health care
 providers and practitioners, including, but not  limited  to,  standards
 for  the  quality  of  care  and  services provided, consistent with the
 education law.
  2. EVERY HEALTH CARE PROVIDER OR PRACTITIONER WHO ADMINISTERS  IMMUNI-
 ZATIONS  SHALL PROVIDE ALL THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION TO THE PATIENT OR A
 PERSON IN PARENTAL RELATION TO THE PATIENT FORTY-EIGHT  HOURS  PRIOR  TO
 ADMINISTERING A VACCINE:
  A.  THE  SAFETY,  BENEFITS,  RISKS  AND POTENTIAL SIDE EFFECTS OF EACH
 VACCINE.
  B. THE LIST OF INGREDIENTS CONTAINED IN EACH VACCINE  AS  PROVIDED  BY
 THE MANUFACTURER AND THE MANUFACTURER PRODUCT INSERT FOR EACH VACCINE.
  C.  THE  UNITED  STATES  CENTERS  FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION'S
 VACCINE EXCIPIENT AND MEDIA SUMMARY.
  D. HOW AND WHERE TO REPORT A VACCINE-ADVERSE EVENT.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06809-01-3