# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "SP4 Herman Emil Anders, Jr. Memorial Bridge"

**Bill ID:** A4924BB
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Joe Angelino
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [A4924BB PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4924BB)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system constituting the bridge on state route 79, crossing over the Chenango River and connecting the town of Greene, county of Chenango, with the town of Fenton, county of Broome, as the "SP4 Herman Emil Anders, Jr. Memorial Bridge".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4924--B
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. ANGELINO -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee  on  Transportation -- committee discharged, bill amended, ordered
  reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee --  recommitted
  to the Committee on Transportation in accordance with Assembly Rule 3,
  sec.  2  --  committee  discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as
  amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "SP4 Herman Emil Anders, Jr.  Memorial
  Bridge"
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-p to
 read as follows:
  ยง 344-P. PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED  AS  THE
 "SP4  HERMAN  EMIL ANDERS, JR. MEMORIAL BRIDGE". ALL THAT PORTION OF THE
 STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM CONSTITUTING THE BRIDGE ON STATE ROUTE 79, CROSSING
 OVER THE CHENANGO RIVER AND CONNECTING THE TOWN  OF  GREENE,  COUNTY  OF
 CHENANGO, WITH THE TOWN OF FENTON, COUNTY OF BROOME, SHALL BE DESIGNATED
 AND KNOWN AS THE "SP4 HERMAN EMIL ANDERS, JR. MEMORIAL BRIDGE".
  ยง  2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the instal-
 lation and maintenance of adequate signing of the state  highway  system
 as  designated  pursuant  to  section one of this act. However, to avoid
 confusion and to limit any possible disruption of commerce,  the  desig-
 nation  called  for  pursuant to section one of this act shall be one of
 ceremonial nature and the official name of  such  bridge  shall  not  be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08089-04-4