# Enacts the sustainable affordable housing and sprawl prevention act

**Bill ID:** A4933A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Anna Kelles
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4933A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4933A)

## Summary

Enacts the "sustainable affordable housing and sprawl prevention act"; exempts or limits environmental review under SEQR for the construction of certain new residential units to avoid creating unnecessary housing sprawl; limits certain rights to action under SEQR; makes related provisions.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4933
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. KELLES -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN  ACT to amend the environmental conservation law and the public hous-
  ing law, in relation to enacting the "sustainable  affordable  housing
  and sprawl prevention act"

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "sustaina-
 ble affordable housing and sprawl prevention act".
  §  2.  The  environmental  conservation law is amended by adding a new
 section 8-0119 to read as follows:
 § 8-0119. CERTAIN ACTIONS EXEMPT OR SUBJECT TO LIMITED REVIEW.
  1. EXEMPT ACTIONS  FOR  CONSTRUCTION  OF  RESIDENTIAL  DWELLINGS.  (A)
 NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY LAW, RULE OR REGULATION TO THE CONTRARY, QUALIFYING
 ACTIONS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A NEW MULTIPLE DWELLING OR MORE THAN ONE
 CONTIGUOUS MULTIPLE DWELLINGS THAT MEET THE FOLLOWING  THRESHOLDS  SHALL
 BE  AUTOMATICALLY  DETERMINED  NOT  TO  HAVE A SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON THE
 ENVIRONMENT AND SHALL BE EXEMPT FROM ANY ENVIRONMENTAL  REVIEW  REQUIRE-
 MENTS  UNDER THIS ARTICLE OR ANY RULES OR REGULATIONS PROMULGATED THERE-
 TO:
  (I) FEWER THAN TEN TOTAL RESIDENTIAL UNITS IN MUNICIPALITIES THAT HAVE
 NOT ADOPTED ZONING OR SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS;
  (II) FEWER THAN FIFTY TOTAL RESIDENTIAL UNITS NOT TO BE CONNECTED  (AT
 THE  COMMENCEMENT  OF  HABITATION) TO EXISTING COMMUNITY OR PUBLIC WATER
 AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS INCLUDING SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS;
  (III) IN A CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE HAVING A POPULATION OF NINETY  THOU-
 SAND  PERSONS OR LESS, FEWER THAN TWO HUNDRED TOTAL RESIDENTIAL UNITS TO
 BE CONNECTED (AT THE COMMENCEMENT OF HABITATION) TO  EXISTING  COMMUNITY
 OR PUBLIC WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS INCLUDING SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS;
  (IV)  IN  A CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE HAVING A POPULATION OF GREATER THAN
 NINETY THOUSAND BUT LESS THAN ONE MILLION, FEWER THAN FIVE HUNDRED TOTAL
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03398-01-3
 A. 4933  2
 
 RESIDENTIAL UNITS TO BE CONNECTED (AT THE COMMENCEMENT OF HABITATION) TO
 EXISTING COMMUNITY OR PUBLIC WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS INCLUDING SEWAGE
 TREATMENT WORKS; OR
  (V)  IN  A  CITY  HAVING  A POPULATION OF ONE MILLION OR MORE PERSONS,
 FEWER THAN ONE THOUSAND TOTAL RESIDENTIAL UNITS TO BE CONNECTED (AT  THE
 COMMENCEMENT  OF  HABITATION)  TO EXISTING COMMUNITY OR PUBLIC WATER AND
 SEWERAGE SYSTEMS INCLUDING SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS.
  (B) TO BE DETERMINED AS A "QUALIFYING ACTION" UNDER PARAGRAPH  (A)  OF
 THIS SUBDIVISION, SUCH ACTION SHALL:
  (I)  BE  LOCATED  IN A CENSUS TRACK DEFINED AS AN URBANIZED AREA OR AN
 URBAN CLUSTER BY THE FEDERAL CENSUS BUREAU;
  (II)  COMPLETE  A PHASE I ENVIRONMENTAL SITE ASSESSMENT (ESA) PURSUANT
 TO THE FEDERAL COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL  RESPONSE,  COMPENSATION  AND
 LIABILITY  ACT  (42  U.S.C.  CHAPTER 103), AND COMPLETE TESTING FOR LEAD
 WATER  AND  PAINT,  ASBESTOS,  AND  RADON, THE RESULTS OF WHICH SHALL BE
 SUBMITTED BY THE PROPOSED DEVELOPER OF SUCH ACTION TO THE  LOCAL  AGENCY
 RESPONSIBLE FOR APPROVING OR DENYING THE APPLICATION FOR SUCH ACTION;
  (III)  RECEIVE  CERTIFICATION  FROM  A QUALIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PROFES-
 SIONAL, AS SUCH TERM IS DEFINED BY THE COMMISSIONER  PURSUANT  TO  REGU-
 LATION,  THAT  SUCH  ACTION,  AS  PROPOSED,  WILL  NOT VIOLATE ANY STATE
 WETLAND LAWS OR DRINKING WATER LAWS UNDER ARTICLE ELEVEN OF  THE  PUBLIC
 HEALTH LAW, OR ANY RULES OR REGULATIONS PROMULGATED THERETO; AND
  (IV) BE CERTIFIED UNDER:
  (1)  THE LEADERSHIP IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN BUILDING RATING
 SYSTEM (LEED) PUBLISHED BY THE UNITED STATES GREEN BUILDING COUNCIL  FOR
 THE  CATEGORY  OF  CERTIFIED  GOLD,  AT MINIMUM, AS DETERMINED BY A LEED
 ACCREDITED PROFESSIONAL;
  (2) ENTERPRISE GREEN COMMUNITIES REVIEW AND CERTIFICATION; OR
  (3) PASSIVE HOUSE INSTITUTE PASSIVE HOUSE CERTIFICATION.
  2. ACTIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF MULTIPLE DWELLINGS SUBJECT  TO  LIMITED
 REVIEW.  NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY  LAW,  RULE OR REGULATION TO THE CONTRARY,
 ACTIONS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF NEW  MULTIPLE  DWELLINGS  THAT  ARE  NOT
 EXEMPT  FROM  ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW UNDER SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION
 SHALL NOT BE SUBJECT TO ANY ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW  STANDARDS  UNDER  THIS
 ARTICLE,  OR  RULES  OR  REGULATIONS  PROMULGATED  THERETO,  THAT DO NOT
 CONSIST OF CORE ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS, AS SUCH TERM SHALL BE DEFINED BY
 THE COMMISSIONER. TOPICS OF REVIEW  THAT  SHALL  BE  EXEMPT  UNDER  THIS
 SUBDIVISION  AS  FAILING  TO  MEET  THE  STANDARD  OF CORE ENVIRONMENTAL
 CONCERNS SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, TRAFFIC IMPACTS,  CASTING
 OF  SHADING  OR  SHADOWS,  IMPACTS  ON VIEWS FROM NEIGHBORING BUILDINGS,
 CONSISTENCY WITH COMMUNITY CHARACTER, IMPACTS ON OPEN SPACE, IMPACTS  ON
 NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER, AND THE RESOURCES OF LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS.
  3.  HISTORIC  SITES.  AN  ACTION  OTHERWISE  EXEMPT FROM ENVIRONMENTAL
 REVIEW REQUIREMENTS  UNDER  SUBDIVISION  ONE  OF  THIS  SECTION  MAY  BE
 REQUIRED TO UNDERGO ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE OR THE
 RULES  OR  REGULATIONS PROMULGATED THERETO ON THE BASIS THAT SUCH ACTION
 OCCURS WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY WITHIN A  HISTORIC  SITE,  PROVIDED,  HOWEVER
 THAT  SUCH  ACTION DIRECTLY INVOLVES A CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY WITHIN SUCH
 HISTORIC SITE, AND PROVIDED FURTHER THAT SUCH  ENVIRONMENTAL  REVIEW  IS
 LIMITED  IN ITS SCOPE TO SUCH CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY. AN ACTION SHALL NOT
 BE REQUIRED TO UNDERGO AN ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW  UNDER  THIS  SUBDIVISION
 SOLELY  ON  THE  BASIS THAT SUCH ACTION IS SUBSTANTIALLY CONTIGUOUS TO A
 HISTORIC SITE, OR LOCATED IN A NEIGHBORHOOD CONTAINING HISTORIC SITES.
  4. AUTHORITY OF THE COMMISSIONER. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL BE AUTHORIZED
 TO CONSULT WITH ANY OTHER STATE OR LOCAL AGENCY AND TO PROMULGATE AND/OR
 A. 4933  3
 
 AMEND ANY RULES AND/OR REGULATIONS HE OR SHE SHALL  DEEM  NECESSARY  FOR
 THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.
  §  3. Paragraph (i) of subdivision 4 of section 8-0105 of the environ-
 mental conservation law, as amended by chapter 252 of the laws of  1977,
 is  amended and five new subdivisions 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 are added to
 read as follows:
  (i) projects or activities  directly  undertaken  by  any  agency;  or
 projects  or  activities  supported  in whole or part through contracts,
 grants, subsidies, loans, or other forms of funding assistance from  one
 or  more agencies; or projects or activities involving the issuance to a
 person of a lease, permit, license, VARIANCE AUTHORIZATION,  certificate
 or  other  entitlement for use or permission to act by one or more agen-
 cies; OR PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES INVOLVING THE ALTERATION OF ZONING ORDI-
 NANCES BY A LOCAL AGENCY;
  10. "HISTORIC SITE" MEANS A HISTORIC  BUILDING,  STRUCTURE,  FACILITY,
 SITE  OR  DISTRICT,  OR  PREHISTORIC SITE THAT IS LISTED ON THE NATIONAL
 REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES (36 CFR PARTS 60 AND 63), OR THAT IS  LISTED
 ON  THE STATE REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES OR THAT HAS BEEN DETERMINED BY
 THE COMMISSIONER OF PARKS, RECREATION AND HISTORIC  PRESERVATION  TO  BE
 ELIGIBLE  FOR  LISTING ON THE STATE REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES PURSUANT
 TO SECTION 14.07 OR 14.09 OF THE PARKS, RECREATION AND HISTORIC  PRESER-
 VATION LAW.
  11.  "CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY" MEANS A BUILDING, STRUCTURE, FACILITY, OR
 SITE LOCATED WITHIN A HISTORIC SITE THAT WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY CONTRIBUTES
 TO SUCH DESIGNATION AS A HISTORIC SITE.
  12. "DWELLING" MEANS ANY BUILDING  OR  STRUCTURE  OR  PORTION  THEREOF
 WHICH  IS OCCUPIED OR INTENDED TO BE OCCUPIED IN WHOLE OR IN PART AS THE
 HOME, RESIDENCE, OR SLEEPING PLACE OF ONE OR MORE HUMAN BEINGS.
  13. "MULTIPLE DWELLING"  MEANS  A  DWELLING  THAT  IS  EITHER  RENTED,
 LEASED,  LET  OR  HIRED OUT, TO BE OCCUPIED, OR IS OCCUPIED AS THE RESI-
 DENCE OR HOME OF FOUR OR MORE SEPARATE INDIVIDUALS OR GROUPS OF INDIVID-
 UALS LIVING INDEPENDENTLY OF EACH OTHER. A "MULTIPLE DWELLING" SHALL NOT
 BE DEEMED TO INCLUDE A CLASS B MULTIPLE DWELLING AS DEFINED  BY  SECTION
 FOUR  OF  THE  MULTIPLE DWELLING LAW, OR A HOSPITAL, CONVENT, MONASTERY,
 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY, OR A  BUILDING  USED  WHOLLY  FOR  COMMERCIAL
 PURPOSES.
  14.  "RESIDENTIAL UNIT" MEANS A ROOM OR GROUP OF ROOMS WITHIN A MULTI-
 PLE DWELLING THAT IS DESIGNATED AS THE LIVING QUARTERS FOR AN INDIVIDUAL
 OR GROUP OF INDIVIDUALS  LIVING  INDEPENDENTLY  FROM  OTHER  INDIVIDUALS
 OCCUPYING SUCH MULTIPLE DWELLING.
  §  4.  Section 8-0109 of the environmental conservation law is amended
 by adding a new subdivision 10 to read as follows:
  10. A COURT SHALL NOT INTERVENE WITH AN ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW CONDUCTED
 PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE OR RULES  OR  REGULATIONS  PROMULGATED  THERETO
 UNLESS  THERE IS SUBSTANTIAL INFORMATION MISSING THAT IS MATERIAL TO THE
 DECISION MAKERS' REVIEW.
  § 5. Section 600 of the public housing law is amended by adding a  new
 subdivision 6 to read as follows:
  6.  A COVERED HOUSING AGENCY IN THIS STATE SHALL BE SUBJECT, AS APPLI-
 CABLE, TO THE PROVISIONS OF ARTICLE EIGHT OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVA-
 TION LAW AND ANY RULES AND/OR REGULATIONS PROMULGATED THERETO.
  § 6. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition,  amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation  of  this act on its effective date are authorized to be made and
 completed on or before such effective date.