# Provides a tax credit for small businesses employing a person previously convicted of a crime

**Bill ID:** A4951
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Anna Kelles
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A4951 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4951)

## Summary

Provides a tax credit for small businesses employing a person previously convicted of a crime; provides a tax credit of one thousand five hundred dollars for each person employed.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4951
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. KELLES, DARLING, REYES, SMULLEN, GLICK, SIMON,
  AUBRY, McDONOUGH, DAVILA -- read once and referred to the Committee on
  Ways and Means
 
 AN ACT to amend the tax law, in relation to providing a tax  credit  for
  small businesses employing a person previously convicted of a crime

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 210-B of the tax law is amended  by  adding  a  new
 subdivision 59 to read as follows:
  59. REHABILITATION OPPORTUNITY TAX CREDIT. A TAXPAYER SHALL BE ALLOWED
 A  CREDIT, AGAINST THE TAX IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE, OF ONE THOUSAND FIVE
 HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR EACH PERSON PREVIOUSLY CONVICTED OF  A  CRIME  HIRED
 DURING  A  TAXABLE  YEAR  AND  RETAINED FOR FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT BY SUCH
 BUSINESS FOR AT LEAST SIX MONTHS. SUCH TAX CREDIT  SHALL  BE  APPLICABLE
 ONLY TO BUSINESSES EMPLOYING FIFTY OR FEWER EMPLOYEES.
  ยง  2. Subparagraph (B) of paragraph 1 of subsection (i) of section 606
 of the tax law is amended by adding a new clause (l) to read as follows:

 (L) REHABILITATION OPPORTUNITY  AMOUNT OF CREDIT UNDER SUBDIVISION
 TAX CREDIT UNDER SUBSECTION (OOO)  FIFTY-NINE OF SECTION TWO HUNDRED
  TEN-B
 
  ยง 3. Section 606 of the tax law is amended by adding a new  subsection
 (ooo) to read as follows:
  (OOO)  REHABILITATION  OPPORTUNITY  TAX  CREDIT.  A  TAXPAYER SHALL BE
 ALLOWED A CREDIT, AGAINST THE TAX IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE, OF ONE  THOU-
 SAND  FIVE  HUNDRED  DOLLARS  FOR  EACH PERSON PREVIOUSLY CONVICTED OF A
 CRIME HIRED DURING A TAXABLE YEAR AND RETAINED FOR FULL-TIME  EMPLOYMENT
 BY  SUCH  BUSINESS  FOR  AT  LEAST  SIX MONTHS. SUCH TAX CREDIT SHALL BE
 APPLICABLE ONLY TO BUSINESSES EMPLOYING FIFTY OR FEWER EMPLOYEES.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09672-01-3