# Authorizes the acceptance of an application for a retroactive property tax exemption from the Center for Jewish Life of Hewlett Inc.

**Bill ID:** A4974BA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Eric Brown
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A4974BA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A4974BA)

## Summary

Authorizes the acceptance of an application for a retroactive property tax exemption from the Center for Jewish Life of Hewlett Inc. for a portion of the 2021--2022 school year taxes and a portion of the 2022 general year assessment roll.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4974--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. E. BROWN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee  on  Real Property Taxation -- committee discharged, bill amended,
  ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT in relation to authorizing  the  county  of  Nassau  assessor  to
  accept  an  application  for a retroactive real property tax exemption
  from the Center for Jewish Life of Hewlett Inc.
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
 the assessor of the county of Nassau is hereby authorized to accept from
 the  Center for Jewish Life of Hewlett Inc. an application for exemption
 from real property taxes pursuant to section 420-a of the real  property
 tax  law  with  respect to the 2021--2022 assessment roll for all of the
 2021--2022 school taxes and all of the 2022 general taxes for the parcel
 conveyed to such organization located  at  24  Everit  Avenue,  town  of
 Hewlett,  county  of  Nassau, otherwise known as Nassau county parcel ID
 section 39 block 78 lot 605.  If  accepted,  the  application  shall  be
 reviewed as if it had been received on or before the taxable status date
 established for such roll.
  If  satisfied  that  such  organization would otherwise be entitled to
 such exemption  if  such  organization  had  filed  an  application  for
 exemption  by  the  appropriate  taxable status date, the assessor, upon
 approval  by  the  Nassau  county  legislature,  may  make  appropriate
 correction  to  the subject rolls. If such exemption is granted and such
 organization, therefore, shall have paid any tax  with  respect  to  the
 subject  rolls,  the applicable governing body or tax department may, in
 its sole discretion, provide for the refund  of  those  taxes  paid  and
 cancel  those  taxes,  fines,  penalties,  liens  or  interest remaining
 unpaid.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07718-02-3