# Relates to giving and/or receiving unlawful benefits

**Bill ID:** A5097
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Charles Lavine
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5097 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5097)

## Summary

Makes it a felony to give or receive unlawful benefits in excess of $3000.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5097
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 2, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. LAVINE -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Codes
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the penal law, in relation to giving and/or receiving
  unlawful benefits
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 200.31 to
 read as follows:
 ยง 200.31 GIVING UNLAWFUL BENEFITS.
  ANYONE WHO OTHERWISE THAN AS PROVIDED BY LAW FOR THE PROPER  DISCHARGE
 OF  OFFICIAL  DUTY  DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY GIVES, OFFERS OR PROMISES ANY
 BENEFIT WITH A VALUE IN EXCESS  OF  THREE  THOUSAND  DOLLARS,  WITH  THE
 EXCEPTION  OF  CAMPAIGN  CONTRIBUTIONS  UNDER  ARTICLE  FOURTEEN  OF THE
 ELECTION LAW, TO ANY PUBLIC OFFICIAL OR PERSON SELECTED TO BE  A  PUBLIC
 OFFICIAL BECAUSE OF THAT PERSON'S OFFICIAL POSITION.
  GIVING UNLAWFUL BENEFITS IS A CLASS E FELONY.
  ยง  2.  The penal law is amended by adding a new section 200.36 to read
 as follows:
 ยง 200.36 RECEIVING UNLAWFUL BENEFITS.
  ANYONE WHO, BEING A PUBLIC OFFICIAL OR PERSON SELECTED TO BE A  PUBLIC
 OFFICIAL,  OTHERWISE THAN AS PROVIDED BY LAW FOR THE PROPER DISCHARGE OF
 OFFICIAL DUTY, DIRECTLY OR  INDIRECTLY  SEEKS,  RECEIVES  OR  AGREES  TO
 RECEIVE  ANY BENEFIT, WITH THE EXCEPTION OF CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS UNDER
 ARTICLE FOURTEEN OF THE ELECTION LAW, WITH A VALUE IN  EXCESS  OF  THREE
 THOUSAND DOLLARS BECAUSE OF THAT PERSON'S OFFICIAL POSITION.
  RECEIVING UNLAWFUL BENEFITS IS A CLASS E FELONY.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02730-01-3