# Relates to commissaries and canteens at correctional institutions

**Bill ID:** A5134
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Crystal Peoples-Stokes
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5134 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5134)

## Summary

Relates to commissaries and canteens at correctional institutions; provides that items for sale at a commissary or canteen shall be sold for market value; provides that money placed into an incarcerated individual's commissary or canteen account or fund shall only be used for purchasing items or goods.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5134
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 2, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. PEOPLES-STOKES -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Correction
 
 AN ACT to amend the correction  law,  in  relation  to  commissaries  or
  canteens in correctional institutions
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 26 of the correction law, as amended by chapter 322
 of the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 26. [Establishment of  commissaries]  COMMISSARIES  or  canteens  in
 correctional institutions. 1. The commissioner may authorize the head of
 any institution in the department to establish a commissary or a canteen
 in such institution for the use and benefit of incarcerated individuals.
 ITEMS  SOLD  AT  THE  COMMISSARY OR CANTEEN SHALL BE SOLD AT THE CURRENT
 MARKET RATE FOR SUCH ITEMS, AS BASED UPON THE COST OF SIMILAR ITEMS  FOR
 SALE  IN  THE  SAME  REGION  AS  THE  CORRECTIONAL  FACILITY. The moneys
 received by the head of the institution as profits from the sales of the
 commissary or canteen shall be deposited in a special fund to  be  known
 as  the  commissary or canteen fund and such funds shall be used for the
 general purposes of the institution subject to the provisions of section
 fifty-three of the state finance law.
  2. MONEY PLACED INTO THE COMMISSARY OR CANTEEN ACCOUNT OR FUND  OF  AN
 INCARCERATED  INDIVIDUAL SHALL ONLY BE USED BY THE INCARCERATED INDIVID-
 UAL FOR PURCHASES AT SUCH COMMISSARY  OR  CANTEEN.  NO  FUNDS  SHALL  BE
 REMOVED  FROM AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL'S COMMISSARY OR CANTEEN ACCOUNT
 OR FUND FOR A VIOLATION, AS A PENALTY, OR FOR ANY REASON  OTHER  THAN  A
 PURCHASE AT SUCH COMMISSARY OR CANTEEN.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04657-01-3