# Requires public hearings a minimum of thirty days prior to any vote to extend mayoral control of New York city schools

**Bill ID:** A5181
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michael Tannousis
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5181 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5181)

## Summary

Requires public hearings to be conducted by the senate education committee and the assembly education committee jointly or separately in Bronx, Kings, New York, Queens and Richmond counties a minimum of thirty days prior to any vote to extend mayoral control of New York city schools.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5181
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  TANNOUSIS  --  read once and referred to the
  Committee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the legislative law, in  relation  to  requiring  public
  hearings prior to extending mayoral control of New York city schools
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The legislative law is amended by adding a new section 32-b
 to read as follows:
  ยง 32-B. EXTENSION OF MAYORAL CONTROL; PUBLIC HEARINGS. AFTER INTRODUC-
 TION AND A MINIMUM OF THIRTY DAYS PRIOR TO VOTING ON ANY BILL  TO  AMEND
 CHAPTER  NINETY-ONE OF THE LAWS OF TWO THOUSAND TWO, AMENDING THE EDUCA-
 TION LAW AND OTHER LAWS RELATING TO REORGANIZATION OF THE NEW YORK  CITY
 SCHOOL  CONSTRUCTION AUTHORITY, BOARD OF EDUCATION AND COMMUNITY BOARDS,
 AND/OR TO AMEND CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED FORTY-FIVE  OF  THE  LAWS  OF  TWO
 THOUSAND NINE, AMENDING THE EDUCATION LAW AND OTHER LAWS RELATING TO THE
 NEW  YORK  CITY  BOARD OF EDUCATION, CHANCELLOR, COMMUNITY COUNCILS, AND
 COMMUNITY SUPERINTENDENTS, IN RELATION TO THE EFFECTIVENESS THEREOF, THE
 SENATE EDUCATION COMMITTEE AND THE ASSEMBLY EDUCATION COMMITTEE  JOINTLY
 OR  SEPARATELY SHALL CONDUCT PUBLIC HEARINGS ON SUCH BILL. SUCH HEARINGS
 SHALL BE CONDUCTED IN BRONX, KINGS, NEW YORK, QUEENS AND RICHMOND  COUN-
 TIES  TO  PROVIDE INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS IN SUCH COUNTIES WITH AN
 OPPORTUNITY TO COMMENT ON SUCH BILL. THE  COMMITTEES  SHALL  MAKE  EVERY
 EFFORT  TO  HEAR ALL THOSE WHO WISH TO PRESENT STATEMENTS AT SUCH PUBLIC
 HEARINGS. THE CHAIRS OF  THE  COMMITTEES  JOINTLY  OR  SEPARATELY  SHALL
 PUBLISH A SCHEDULE OF SUCH HEARINGS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05155-01-3