# Provides for the pension benefits for first grade police officers of the city of New York who have served for 25 or 30 years

**Bill ID:** A5202BA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Stacey Pheffer Amato
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5202BA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5202BA)

## Summary

Provides for the pension benefits for first grade police officers of the city of New York who have served for 25 or 30 years.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5202--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 6, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. PHEFFER AMATO -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Governmental  Employees  --  committee  discharged,  bill
  amended,  ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted to said commit-
  tee
 
 AN ACT to amend the administrative code of the  city  of  New  York,  in
  relation to the pensionable earnings of first grade police officers
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Legislative findings and declaration. The legislature here-
 by finds and declares that an  adjustment  to  pensionable  earnings  of
 first  grade  police  officers is necessary to enhance public safety and
 prevent the loss of vital public services in this state. The legislature
 hereby finds and declares that such adjustment is necessary to  address,
 inter  alia,  the  historic  police  officer  recruitment  and retention
 crisis, the increase in police overtime, and the rise in crime impacting
 New Yorkers.  Therefore, the legislature declares the necessity for  the
 enactment  of  this  act  to  enhance  public safety and protect against
 disruption of vital public services in this state.
  ยง 2. Section 14-111 of the administrative code of the city of New York
 is amended by adding two new subdivisions c and d to read as follows:
  C.  WHEN A FIRST GRADE POLICE OFFICER OF  THE  NEW  YORK  CITY  POLICE
 DEPARTMENT  SHALL HAVE SERVED IN THE RANK OF POLICE OFFICER FOR A PERIOD
 OF TWENTY-FIVE YEARS, HE OR SHE SHALL HAVE THE SAME RIGHTS IN RESPECT TO
 THE NEW YORK STATE AND LOCAL POLICE AND FIRE RETIREMENT  SYSTEM  OR  THE
 NEW  YORK CITY POLICE PENSION FUND AS A POLICE OFFICER DESIGNATED TO ACT
 AS DETECTIVE OF THE THIRD GRADE WHO SHALL HAVE  SERVED  AS  SUCH  FOR  A
 PERIOD  OF  TIME  AGGREGATING TWO YEARS AT THE HIGHEST SALARY RATE FOR A
 DETECTIVE OF THE THIRD GRADE.
  D. WHEN A FIRST GRADE POLICE OFFICER  OF  THE  NEW  YORK  CITY  POLICE
 DEPARTMENT  SHALL HAVE SERVED IN THE RANK OF POLICE OFFICER FOR A PERIOD
 OF THIRTY YEARS, HE OR SHE SHALL HAVE THE SAME RIGHTS IN RESPECT TO  THE
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04845-04-3
 A. 5202--A  2
 
 NEW  YORK  STATE  AND LOCAL POLICE AND FIRE RETIREMENT SYSTEM OR THE NEW
 YORK CITY POLICE PENSION FUND AS A SERGEANT WHO  SHALL  HAVE  SERVED  AS
 SUCH  FOR  A  PERIOD OF TIME AGGREGATING TWO YEARS AT THE HIGHEST SALARY
 RATE FOR A SERGEANT.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  SUMMARY  OF BILL: This proposed legislation would amend Section 14-111
 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York (ACCNY) to allow  for
 a  Police  Officer  1st  Grade  of  the  New York City Police Department
 (NYPD), who has been a Police Officer for at least 25 years, to have the
 same rights in respect to the New York City Police Pension Fund (POLICE)
 as a Police Officer designated to  act  as  a  Detective  3rd  Grade  by
 including,  for  pension purposes, the highest salary for such Detective
 aggregating for two years. This proposed legislation will also allow for
 a Police Officer 1st Grade of the NYPD, who has been  a  Police  Officer
 for at least 30 years, to have the same rights in respect to POLICE as a
 Sergeant by including, for pension purposes, the highest salary for such
 Sergeants aggregating for two years.
  Effective Date: Upon enactment.
  IMPACT  ON  BENEFITS:  The  proposed legislation would permit a Police
 Officer 1st Grade, who have met certain service  requirements,  to  have
 their pension calculations based on a higher salary.
  A  Police  Officer  1st Grade with at least 25 years of service would,
 under this proposed legislation, if  enacted,  receive  an  increase  in
 their  annual pension benefit of approximately $5,400 per year. A Police
 Officer 1st Grade with at least 30 years of service  would,  under  this
 proposed  legislation,  if  enacted, receive an increase in their annual
 pension benefit of approximately $15,700 per year. This is  due  to  the
 assumed  higher  salary  and  overtime  and assumes a service retirement
 benefit with 25 years and 30 years of service, respectively.
  Based on this increase and an estimate of the number of POLICE members
 that are expected to be impacted by this change, it is estimated that if
 this proposed legislation is enacted,  the  annual  increase  in  POLICE
 pension benefits paid will be approximately $0.8 million per year.
  With  respect  to  an individual member, the impact on benefits due to
 this proposed legislation could vary greatly depending on  the  member's
 age, years of service, retirement cause, and Tier.
  FINANCIAL  IMPACT - PRESENT VALUES: Based on the actuarial assumptions
 and methods described herein, the enactment of this proposed legislation
 would increase the Present Value of Future Benefits (PVFB)  by  approxi-
 mately $10.0 million every year.
  FINANCIAL  IMPACT  -  ANNUAL EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS: Enactment of this
 proposed legislation would increase employer contributions,  where  such
 amount  would  depend on the number of members affected as well as other
 characteristics including the age, years of service, and salary  history
 of  the  member. Future years' costs would depend on the number of reti-
 rees who benefit under the legislation amongst other factors.
  The estimate of the increase  in  annual  employer  contributions  for
 Fiscal  Years  2025  through 2029, assuming a homogeneous population and
 consistent retirement pattern, is shown in the table below.
 
  Fiscal  Increase in
  Year  Employer Contributions
  ($ Millions)
  2025  $ 1.2
  2026  $ 2.4
 A. 5202--A  3
 
  2027  $ 3.6
  2028  $ 4.8
  2029  $ 6.0
 
  Since  the  number  of Police Officers impacted by the proposed legis-
 lation cannot be known in advance with credibility, the increase in PVFB
 due to this legislation has been treated as an actuarial  loss  and  was
 amortized  over  a closed 15-year period (14 payments under the One-Year
 Lag Methodology) using level dollar payments.
  CENSUS DATA: The estimates presented herein are based  on  the  census
 data  used  in the June 30, 2022 actuarial valuation of POLICE to deter-
 mine the Preliminary Fiscal Year 2024 employer contribution. To estimate
 the number of retirees who could potentially benefit from this  proposed
 legislation,  data  from  the  prior actuarial valuations for POLICE was
 used. Below is a summary of the data from the prior valuations:
  * Police Officer 1st Grade who retired with 25-29 years in rank -  908
 retired over the past 10 years.
  *  Police  Officer  1st Grade who retired with 30+ years in rank - 202
 retired over the past 10 years.
  ACTUARIAL ASSUMPTIONS AND METHODS: The estimates presented herein have
 been calculated based on the actuarial assumptions and methods used  for
 the Preliminary Fiscal Year 2024 employer contributions of POLICE.
  For  the  purposes of this Fiscal Note, it is assumed that the changes
 would be reflected for the first time in the  June  30,  2023  actuarial
 valuation  of POLICE used to determine employer contributions for Fiscal
 Year 2025.
  The salaries used in this analysis have been adjusted consistent  with
 the salary adjustments used in the June 30, 2022 actuarial valuation.
  RISK  AND  UNCERTAINTY: The costs presented in this Fiscal Note depend
 highly on the realization of the actuarial assumptions used,  demograph-
 ics  of  the  impacted  population and other factors such as investment,
 contribution, and other risks. If actual experience deviates from  actu-
 arial  assumptions,  the  actual costs could differ from those presented
 herein.
  Costs are also dependent on the actuarial methods used, and  therefore
 different actuarial methods could produce different results. Quantifying
 these risks is beyond the scope of this Fiscal Note.
  Not measured in this Fiscal Note are the following:
  *  The  initial  additional  administrative  costs  to  implement  the
 proposed legislation.
  STATEMENT OF ACTUARIAL OPINION: I, Marek  Tyszkiewicz,  am  the  Chief
 Actuary  for,  and  independent of, the New York City Retirement Systems
 and Pension Funds. I am an Associate of the Society of Actuaries  and  a
 Member of the American Academy of Actuaries. I am a member of NYCERS but
 do  not  believe  it impairs my objectivity and I meet the Qualification
 Standards of the American Academy of Actuaries to render  the  actuarial
 opinion  contained  herein.  To  the  best  of my knowledge, the results
 contained  herein  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  generally
 accepted  actuarial  principles  and  procedures  and with the Actuarial
 Standards of Practice issued by the Actuarial Standards Board.
  FISCAL NOTE IDENTIFICATION: This Fiscal Note 2023-19 dated  March  31,
 2023  was  prepared  by  the  Chief Actuary for the New York City Police
 Pension Fund. This estimate is intended for use  only  during  the  2023
 Legislative Session.