# Relates to designating an individual to be notified in the case of dose or brand change for psychotropic medication

**Bill ID:** A5218
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** William A. Barclay
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5218 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5218)

## Summary

Designates an individual to be notified in the case of dose or brand change for psychotropic medication.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5218
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 7, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  BARCLAY,  MANKTELOW,  LEMONDES,  DeSTEFANO,
  J. M. GIGLIO, BLANKENBUSH -- read once and referred to  the  Committee
  on Health
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the public health law, in relation to designating an
  individual to be notified in the case of  dose  or  brand  change  for
  psychotropic medication

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 3 of section 2803-c of the public health law is
 amended by adding a new paragraph s to read as follows:
  S. (I) PURSUANT TO REGULATIONS PROMULGATED BY THE COMMISSIONER,  EVERY
 PATIENT  SHALL  HAVE THE RIGHT TO DESIGNATE AN INDIVIDUAL TO BE NOTIFIED
 IN THE EVENT THAT THE FACILITY REDUCES THE DOSE OR CHANGES THE BRAND  OR
 FORM  OF  THE PATIENT'S PSYCHOTROPIC MEDICATION. SUCH NOTIFICATION SHALL
 INCLUDE A WARNING LISTING POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS AND  DRUG  INTERACTIONS,
 INCLUDING  SIDE EFFECTS UPON DISCONTINUATION OF SUCH DRUGS. NOTIFICATION
 SHALL BE MADE IN WRITING, AND SHALL NOT BE EFFECTIVE  UNTIL  RECEIPT  OF
 THE WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE DESIGNATED INDIVIDUAL. IN THE CASE OF A GRAD-
 UAL  DOSE  REDUCTION,  A  DESIGNEE  SHALL CHECK A BOX ACKNOWLEDGING SUCH
 DESIGNEE HAS BEEN GIVEN A COPY OF THE RIGHTS PERTAINING TO GRADUAL  DOSE
 REDUCTIONS.
  (II)  FOR  THE  PURPOSES  OF THIS PARAGRAPH, "PSYCHOTROPIC MEDICATION"
 MEANS A MEDICATION THAT IS ADMINISTERED FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF  AFFECTING
 BRAIN  ACTIVITIES ASSOCIATED WITH MENTAL PROCESSES AND BEHAVIOR, INCLUD-
 ING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANTI-PSYCHOTICS, ANTI-DEPRESSANTS, ANXIOLYTICS,
 SEDATIVES AND HYPNOTICS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04918-01-3