# Updates provisions relating to dignity for all students and makes an appropriation therefor

**Bill ID:** A5318AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Daniel O'Donnell
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [A5318AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5318AA)

## Summary

Updates provisions relating to dignity for all students including establishing the student suicide prevention act which includes curriculum and teacher training requirements designed to prevent student suicide with a focus on LGBTQ students; makes an appropriation therefor.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5318--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 7, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. O'DONNELL, GLICK, BRONSON, SIMONE, BENEDETTO,
  WOERNER, BURDICK, PAULIN, FAHY, EPSTEIN, THIELE, KELLES, TAGUE,  HEVE-
  SI,  SIMON, WALSH -- read once and referred to the Committee on Educa-
  tion -- recommitted to the Committee on Education in  accordance  with
  Assembly Rule 3, sec. 2 -- committee discharged, bill amended, ordered
  reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the education law, in relation to updating provisions
  relating to dignity for all  students;  and  making  an  appropriation
  therefor
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  Section 10 of the education law, as added by  chapter  482
 of the laws of 2010, is amended to read as follows:
  § 10. Legislative intent. The legislature finds that students' ability
 to  learn and to meet high academic standards, and a school's ability to
 educate its students, are compromised by incidents of discrimination  or
 harassment  including  bullying,  taunting or intimidation. It is hereby
 declared to be the policy of the state to afford all students in  public
 schools an environment free of discrimination and harassment, WHETHER IN
 THE  SCHOOL  BUILDING OR ON THE INTERNET. The purpose of this article is
 to foster civility in public schools and to prevent and prohibit conduct
 which is inconsistent with a school's educational mission.
  § 2. Paragraphs e and l of subdivision 1 of section 13 of  the  educa-
 tion law, as added by chapter 102 of the laws of 2012, are amended and a
 new paragraph m is added to read as follows:
  e. require the school, when an investigation reveals any such verified
 harassment,  bullying  or discrimination, to take prompt actions reason-
 ably calculated to end the harassment, bullying or discrimination, elim-
 inate any hostile environment, create a more positive school culture and
 climate, prevent recurrence of the behavior, and ensure  the  safety  of
 the  student  or  students  against  whom  such  harassment, bullying or
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09917-03-4
 A. 5318--A  2
 
 discrimination was directed. Such actions shall be consistent  with  the
 guidelines  created  pursuant  to  subdivision  four of this section AND
 SHALL  TAKE  INTO  CONSIDERATION  WHETHER  NOTIFICATION  OF  PERSONS  IN
 PARENTAL  RELATION  TO THE STUDENT WHO IS THE SUBJECT OF SUCH HARASSMENT
 IS IN THE BEST INTEREST OF THE STUDENT;
  l. maintain current versions of the school district's policies created
 pursuant to this section on the school district's internet  website,  if
 one exists; AND
  M. INCLUDE SAFE, RESPONSIBLE USE OF THE INTERNET AND ELECTRONIC COMMU-
 NICATIONS; AND
  §  3.  Subdivision 5 of section 14 of the education law, as amended by
 chapter 90 of the laws of 2013, is amended to read as follows:
  5. [The  commissioner  shall  prescribe]  PRESCRIBE  regulations  that
 school  professionals  applying  on  or after December thirty-first, two
 thousand thirteen for a certificate or license, including but not limit-
 ed to a certificate or license valid for service as a classroom teacher,
 school counselor, school  psychologist,  school  social  worker,  school
 administrator or supervisor or superintendent of schools shall, in addi-
 tion  to  all  other  certification  or  licensing  requirements,  have
 completed training on the social patterns of  harassment,  bullying  and
 discrimination,  as defined in section eleven of this article, including
 but not limited to those acts based on a person's  actual  or  perceived
 race,  color, weight, national origin, ethnic group, religion, religious
 practice, disability, sexual orientation, gender or sex, the identifica-
 tion and mitigation of  harassment,  bullying  and  discrimination,  and
 strategies  for  effectively  addressing problems of exclusion, bias and
 aggression in educational settings.
  § 4. Section 15 of the education law, as amended by chapter 102 of the
 laws of 2012, is amended to read as follows:
  § 15. Reporting by commissioner AND USE OF REPORTS.  1.  The  commis-
 sioner  shall  create  a  procedure  under  which  material incidents of
 harassment, bullying and discrimination on school grounds or at a school
 function are reported to the department at least  on  an  annual  basis.
 Such procedure shall provide that such reports shall, wherever possible,
 also  delineate  the  specific  nature  of such incidents of harassment,
 bullying and discrimination, provided that the commissioner  may  comply
 with  the  requirements  of  this  section  through  use of the existing
 uniform violent incident reporting system. In addition,  the  department
 may  conduct  research  or  undertake  studies  to  determine compliance
 throughout the state with the provisions of this article.
  2. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL  USE  SUCH  REPORTS  AND  DATA  TO  IDENTIFY
 SCHOOLS  AND DISTRICTS THAT ARE FAILING TO MEET THE STANDARDS AND OBJEC-
 TIVES OF THIS ARTICLE. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL  PROMULGATE  POLICIES  AND
 PROCEDURES  FOR  IMPROVING  CONDITIONS AT THESE SCHOOLS TO ENSURE PROPER
 TRAINING, SUPPORT, AND COMPLIANCE WITH ALL REQUIREMENTS.
  3. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL DELIVER THE REPORT REFERENCED IN SUBDIVISION
 ONE OF THIS SECTION TO THE LEGISLATURE EVERY TWO YEARS.
  § 5. The education law is amended by adding a new article 2-A to  read
 as follows:
  ARTICLE 2-A
  STUDENT SUICIDE PREVENTION
 SECTION 20. LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
  21. DEFINITIONS.
  22. POLICIES, PROCEDURES, AND GUIDELINES.
  23. APPLICATION.
  24. SEVERABILITY AND CONSTRUCTION.
 A. 5318--A  3
 
  §  20.  LEGISLATIVE  INTENT.  THE  LEGISLATURE  FINDS AND DECLARES THE
 FOLLOWING:
  1.  ACCORDING TO DATA FROM THE FEDERAL CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
 PREVENTION AS REPORTED IN THE YEAR TWO THOUSAND SIXTEEN, SUICIDE IS  THE
 SECOND  LEADING CAUSE OF DEATH FOR YOUTH AND YOUNG ADULTS TEN TO TWENTY-
 FOUR YEARS OF AGE, INCLUSIVE, IN BOTH THE UNITED STATES AND IN NEW  YORK
 STATE.
  2.  AS  CHILDREN  AND  TEENS SPEND A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT OF THEIR YOUNG
 LIVES IN SCHOOL, THE PERSONNEL WHO INTERACT WITH THEM ON A  DAILY  BASIS
 ARE  ESSENTIAL  GATEKEEPERS FOR RECOGNIZING WARNING SIGNS OF SUICIDE AND
 MAKING THE APPROPRIATE REFERRALS FOR HELP.
  3. IN A NATIONAL SURVEY CONDUCTED BY THE JASON FOUNDATION,  A  TEACHER
 WAS  IDENTIFIED AS THE NUMBER ONE PERSON TO WHOM A STUDENT WOULD TURN TO
 HELP A FRIEND WHO MIGHT BE SUICIDAL. IT IS IMPERATIVE THAT WHEN A  YOUNG
 PERSON  COMES  TO  A  TEACHER  FOR HELP, SUCH TEACHER HAS THE KNOWLEDGE,
 TOOLS, AND RESOURCES TO RESPOND CORRECTLY.
  4. IN THE YEAR TWO THOUSAND EIGHTEEN, THE FEDERAL CENTERS FOR  DISEASE
 CONTROL  AND  PREVENTION  FOUND  IN  ITS YOUTH RISK BEHAVIOR SURVEY THAT
 LESBIAN, GAY, AND BISEXUAL YOUTH ARE ALMOST FOUR TIMES  MORE  LIKELY  TO
 SERIOUSLY CONSIDER ATTEMPTING SUICIDE, HAVE MADE A SUICIDE PLAN, OR HAVE
 ATTEMPTED SUICIDE, THAN THEIR HETEROSEXUAL PEERS.
  5.  THERE  ARE  NATIONAL  HOTLINES AVAILABLE TO HELP ADULTS AND YOUTH,
 INCLUDING LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,  TRANSGENDER,  QUEER,  OR  QUESTIONING
 (LGBTQ) YOUTH, WHO ARE EXPERIENCING SUICIDAL IDEATION OR WHO ARE WORRIED
 ABOUT A FAMILY MEMBER OR PEER WHO MAY BE AT RISK, INCLUDING THE NATIONAL
 SUICIDE  PREVENTION  LIFELINE,  THE CRISIS TEXT LINE, THE TREVOR PROJECT
 LIFELINE, AND TREVORCHAT.
  6. ACCORDING TO THE FAMILY  ACCEPTANCE  PROJECT,  RESEARCH  HAS  FOUND
 THAT,  FOR  AN  LGBTQ  YOUTH,  HAVING  AT LEAST ONE SUPPORTIVE ADULT CAN
 REDUCE THE YOUTH'S RISK OF SUICIDE.
  7. NEW YORK STATE SCHOOLS FACE THE SERIOUS ISSUES OF STUDENTS AT  HIGH
 RISK  OF  SUICIDE AND DEATH BY SUICIDE IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITIES. SCHOOL
 PERSONNEL MUST BE SUPPORTED BY  CLEAR  POLICIES  AND  PROCEDURES,  WHICH
 SERVE AS AN EASILY-ACCESSIBLE ROADMAP, ELIMINATE CONFUSION OVER EDUCATOR
 ROLES  AND  THE  REFERRAL PROCESS, AND EQUIP EDUCATORS WITH THE TOOLS TO
 RESPOND SAFELY WHEN A SUICIDE DOES OCCUR IN THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY.
  § 21. DEFINITIONS. FOR THE PURPOSES OF  THIS  ARTICLE,  THE  FOLLOWING
 TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  1. "CRISIS SITUATION" MEANS A SITUATION WHERE A TEACHER OR OTHER LOCAL
 EDUCATIONAL AGENCY EMPLOYEE BELIEVES A STUDENT OR OTHER INDIVIDUAL IS IN
 IMMINENT DANGER OF A SUICIDE ATTEMPT.
  2.  "LGBTQ" MEANS INDIVIDUALS WHO IDENTIFY, WITH REGARDS TO GENDER, AS
 BEING LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL, TRANSGENDER, QUEER, OR QUESTIONING.
  3. "LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCY" MEANS A SCHOOL DISTRICT, BOARD OF  COOP-
 ERATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES, SCHOOL, OR THE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT.
  4.  "SUICIDE  INTERVENTION" MEANS SPECIFIC ACTIONS SCHOOLS CAN TAKE IN
 RESPONSE TO SUICIDAL BEHAVIOR BY A STUDENT, INCLUDING, BUT  NOT  LIMITED
 TO:
  A. STUDENT SUPERVISION;
  B. NOTIFICATION OF PARENTS OR GUARDIANS;
  C. CRISIS SITUATION RESPONSE PROTOCOLS;
  D.  WHEN  AND  HOW TO REQUEST AN IMMEDIATE MENTAL HEALTH ASSESSMENT OR
 EMERGENCY SERVICES; AND
  E. SCHOOL  RE-ENTRY  PROCEDURES  FOLLOWING  A  STUDENT  MENTAL  HEALTH
 CRISIS.
 A. 5318--A  4
 
  5.  "SUICIDE  POSTVENTION"  MEANS  PLANNED  SUPPORT  AND INTERVENTIONS
 SCHOOLS CAN IMPLEMENT AFTER A SUICIDE ATTEMPT  OR  SUICIDE  DEATH  OF  A
 MEMBER OF THE SCHOOL COMMUNITY THAT ARE DESIGNED TO:
  A. REDUCE THE RISK OF THE SPREAD OF SUICIDAL THOUGHTS OR INTENTIONS;
  B. PROVIDE SUPPORT FOR AFFECTED STUDENTS AND SCHOOL-BASED PERSONNEL;
  C. ADDRESS THE SOCIAL STIGMA ASSOCIATED WITH SUICIDE; AND
  D. DISSEMINATE FACTUAL INFORMATION ABOUT SUICIDE AND ITS PREVENTION.
  6.  "SUICIDE  PREVENTION"  MEANS  SPECIFIC ACTIONS SCHOOLS CAN TAKE TO
 RECOGNIZE AND REDUCE SUICIDAL BEHAVIOR, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO:
  A. IDENTIFYING RISKS AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS FOR  SUICIDE  AND  SUICIDE
 WARNING SIGNS;
  B.  ESTABLISHING  A PROCESS BY WHICH STUDENTS ARE REFERRED TO A MENTAL
 AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROVIDER FOR HELP;
  C. MAKING AVAILABLE SCHOOL-BASED  AND  COMMUNITY-BASED  MENTAL  HEALTH
 SUPPORTS;
  D.  PROVIDING  THE  LOCATION OF AVAILABLE ONLINE AND COMMUNITY SUICIDE
 PREVENTION RESOURCES, INCLUDING LOCAL CRISIS CENTERS AND HOTLINES;
  E. ADOPTING  POLICIES  AND  PROTOCOLS  REGARDING  SUICIDE  PREVENTION,
 INTERVENTION,  AND  POSTVENTION,  SCHOOL  SAFETY, AND RESPONSE TO CRISIS
 SITUATIONS;
  F. TRAINING FOR SCHOOL PERSONNEL WHO INTERACT DIRECTLY  WITH  STUDENTS
 IN RECOGNIZING SUICIDE RISKS AND WARNING SIGNS AND HOW TO REFER STUDENTS
 FOR FURTHER ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION; AND
  G.  INSTRUCTION  TO  STUDENTS  IN PROBLEM-SOLVING AND COPING SKILLS TO
 PROMOTE STUDENTS' MENTAL, EMOTIONAL, AND SOCIAL HEALTH  AND  WELL-BEING,
 AND  INSTRUCTION IN RECOGNIZING AND APPROPRIATELY RESPONDING TO SIGNS OF
 SUICIDAL INTENT IN OTHERS.
  § 22. POLICIES, PROCEDURES, AND GUIDELINES. 1. THE GOVERNING BOARD  OR
 BODY  OF  EVERY  LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCY THAT SERVES STUDENTS IN GRADES
 SEVEN TO TWELVE, INCLUSIVE, SHALL, BEFORE THE FIRST DAY OF  AUGUST,  TWO
 THOUSAND  TWENTY-FOUR,  ADOPT  POLICIES,  PROCEDURES,  AND GUIDELINES ON
 STUDENT SUICIDE PREVENTION, INTERVENTION, AND POSTVENTION  FOR  STUDENTS
 IN  SUCH  GRADES.  SUCH  POLICIES,  PROCEDURES,  AND GUIDELINES SHALL BE
 DEVELOPED  IN  CONSULTATION  WITH  SCHOOL  AND  COMMUNITY  STAKEHOLDERS,
 SCHOOL-EMPLOYED  MENTAL  HEALTH  PROFESSIONALS,  AND  SUICIDE PREVENTION
 EXPERTS, AND SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  A. METHODS TO INCREASE AWARENESS OF THE RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  SUICIDE
 AND SUICIDE RISK FACTORS, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO:
  I. MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE CONDITIONS;
  II. CHILDHOOD ABUSE, NEGLECT, OR TRAUMA;
  III. PROLONGED STRESS, INCLUDING INDIVIDUAL EXPERIENCES SUCH AS BULLY-
 ING,  HARASSMENT, FAMILY OR RELATIONSHIP STRESS, OR OTHER STRESSFUL LIFE
 EVENTS, AS WELL AS  COLLECTIVE  STRESSORS  SUCH  AS  SYSTEMIC  BIAS  AND
 DISCRIMINATION;
  IV. EXPOSURE TO ANOTHER PERSON'S SUICIDE, OR SENSATIONALIZED OR GRAPH-
 IC ACCOUNTS OF SUICIDE; AND
  V.  PREVIOUS SUICIDE ATTEMPTS OR HISTORY OF SUICIDE WITHIN A STUDENT'S
 FAMILY;
  B. IDENTIFICATION OF TRAINING  OPPORTUNITIES  ON  RECOGNIZING  SUICIDE
 RISKS, AND REFERRAL PROCEDURES AVAILABLE TO SCHOOL EMPLOYEES;
  C.  AVAILABILITY  OF  EXPERTISE  FROM  SCHOOL  EMPLOYEES WHO HAVE BEEN
 TRAINED IN RECOGNIZING SUICIDE RISKS, AND REFERRAL PROCEDURES;
  D. HOW SCHOOL EMPLOYEES SHOULD  RESPOND  TO  SUSPICION,  CONCERNS,  OR
 WARNING SIGNS OF SUICIDE IN STUDENTS;
  E.  HOW  SCHOOL EMPLOYEES SHOULD RESPOND TO A CRISIS SITUATION WHERE A
 STUDENT IS IN IMMINENT DANGER TO HIMSELF OR HERSELF;
 A. 5318--A  5
 
  F. POLICIES AND PROTOCOLS FOR COMMUNICATION  WITH  PARENTS,  INCLUDING
 THOSE  THAT  SPECIFY  WHAT  TO DO IF PARENTAL NOTIFICATION IS NOT IN THE
 BEST INTEREST OF THE STUDENT;
  G.  COUNSELING  SERVICES  AVAILABLE WITHIN THE SCHOOL FOR STUDENTS AND
 THEIR FAMILIES THAT ARE RELATED TO SUICIDE PREVENTION;
  H. AVAILABILITY OF  INFORMATION  CONCERNING  CRISIS  SITUATION  INTER-
 VENTION, SUICIDE PREVENTION, AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES IN THE COMMUNITY
 FOR STUDENTS AND THEIR FAMILIES AND SCHOOL EMPLOYEES;
  I.  IDENTIFICATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  PARTNERSHIPS  WITH COMMUNITY
 ORGANIZATIONS AND AGENCIES FOR REFERRAL OF STUDENTS  TO  HEALTH,  MENTAL
 HEALTH,  SUBSTANCE  USE, AND SOCIAL SUPPORT SERVICES, INCLUDING DEVELOP-
 MENT OF AT LEAST ONE  MEMORANDUM  OF  UNDERSTANDING  BETWEEN  THE  LOCAL
 EDUCATION  AGENCY AND SUCH AN ORGANIZATION OR AGENCY IN THE COMMUNITY OR
 REGION;
  J. DEVELOPMENT OF A CULTURALLY COMPETENT PLAN TO ASSIST  SURVIVORS  OF
 ATTEMPTED  SUICIDE AND TO ASSIST STUDENTS AND SCHOOL EMPLOYEES IN COPING
 WITH AN ATTEMPTED SUICIDE OR A SUICIDE DEATH WITHIN THE SCHOOL  COMMUNI-
 TY; AND
  K.  DEVELOPMENT  OF ANY OTHER RELATED PROGRAM OR ACTIVITY FOR STUDENTS
 OR SCHOOL EMPLOYEES.
  2. THE POLICIES, PROCEDURES, AND GUIDELINES ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SUBDI-
 VISION ONE OF THIS SECTION SHALL SPECIFICALLY ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF HIGH-
 RISK GROUPS, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE FOLLOWING:
  A. YOUTH WHO HAVE LOST A FRIEND OR FAMILY MEMBER TO SUICIDE;
  B. YOUTH WITH DISABILITIES OR WITH CHRONIC HEALTH CONDITIONS,  INCLUD-
 ING MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE CONDITIONS;
  C. YOUTH EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS OR IN OUT-OF-HOME SETTINGS, SUCH AS
 FOSTER CARE; AND
  D. LGBTQ YOUTH.
  3. THE POLICIES, PROCEDURES, AND GUIDELINES ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SUBDI-
 VISION  ONE  OF  THIS  SECTION  SHALL BE WRITTEN TO ENSURE THAT A SCHOOL
 EMPLOYEE ACTS ONLY WITHIN THE AUTHORIZATION AND SCOPE OF SUCH EMPLOYEE'S
 CREDENTIAL OR LICENSE.  NOTHING IN THIS SECTION SHALL  BE  CONSTRUED  AS
 AUTHORIZING OR ENCOURAGING A SCHOOL EMPLOYEE TO DIAGNOSE OR TREAT MENTAL
 HEALTH  CONDITIONS  UNLESS  SUCH  EMPLOYEE  IS SPECIFICALLY LICENSED AND
 EMPLOYED TO DO SO.
  4. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF  LAW  TO  THE  CONTRARY,  NO
 CAUSE  OF ACTION MAY BE BROUGHT FOR ANY LOSS OR DAMAGE CAUSED BY ANY ACT
 OR OMISSION RESULTING FROM THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF  THIS
 ARTICLE,  OR  RESULTING FROM ANY TRAINING, OR LACK OF TRAINING, REQUIRED
 BY THIS ARTICLE. NOTHING IN THIS ARTICLE SHALL BE  CONSTRUED  TO  IMPOSE
 ANY SPECIFIC DUTY OF CARE.
  5.  TO  ASSIST  LOCAL  EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES IN DEVELOPING POLICIES FOR
 STUDENT SUICIDE PREVENTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL  DEVELOP  AND  MAINTAIN
 MODEL  POLICIES,  PROCEDURES,  AND  GUIDELINES  IN  ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
 SECTION TO SERVE AS A GUIDE FOR LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.  SUCH  MODEL
 POLICIES,  PROCEDURES, AND GUIDELINES SHALL BE POSTED WITHIN THIRTY DAYS
 OF THEIR COMPLETION ON THE DEPARTMENT'S  INTERNET  WEBSITE,  ALONG  WITH
 RELEVANT  RESOURCES AND INFORMATION TO SUPPORT SCHOOLS IN DEVELOPING AND
 IMPLEMENTING THE POLICIES, PROCEDURES,  AND  GUIDELINES  REQUIRED  UNDER
 SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION.
  6.  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD  OR  BODY OF A LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCY THAT
 SERVES STUDENTS IN GRADES SEVEN TO TWELVE, INCLUSIVE, SHALL  REVIEW,  AT
 MINIMUM  EVERY  FIFTH YEAR FOLLOWING THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS ARTICLE,
 ITS POLICIES, PROCEDURES, AND GUIDELINES ON STUDENT  SUICIDE  PREVENTION
 AND, IF NECESSARY, UPDATE SUCH POLICIES, PROCEDURES, AND GUIDELINES.
 A. 5318--A  6
 
  §  23.  APPLICATION. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE SHALL APPLY TO ALL
 PRIVATE AND PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN NEW YORK STATE.
  §  24.  SEVERABILITY  AND CONSTRUCTION. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE
 SHALL BE SEVERABLE, AND IF ANY COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION  DECLARES
 ANY PHRASE, CLAUSE, SENTENCE OR PROVISION OF THIS ARTICLE TO BE INVALID,
 OR ITS APPLICABILITY TO ANY GOVERNMENT AGENCY, PERSON OR CIRCUMSTANCE IS
 DECLARED  INVALID, THE REMAINDER OF THIS ARTICLE AND ITS RELEVANT APPLI-
 CABILITY SHALL NOT BE AFFECTED. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE SHALL  BE
 LIBERALLY CONSTRUED TO GIVE EFFECT TO THE PURPOSES THEREOF.
  §  6. Section 801-a of the education law, as amended by section 102 of
 the laws of 2012, is amended to read as follows:
  § 801-a. Instruction in civility, citizenship [and], character  educa-
 tion, DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP, AND MEDIA LITERACY.
  1.  FOR  THE  PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE
 THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  A. "TOLERANCE", "RESPECT FOR  OTHERS",  AND  "DIGNITY"  SHALL  INCLUDE
 AWARENESS  AND  SENSITIVITY TO HARASSMENT, BULLYING, DISCRIMINATION, AND
 CIVILITY IN  THE  RELATIONS  OF  PEOPLE  OF  DIFFERENT  RACES,  WEIGHTS,
 NATIONAL  ORIGINS, ETHNIC GROUPS, RELIGIONS, RELIGIOUS PRACTICES, MENTAL
 OR PHYSICAL ABILITIES, SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS, GENDERS, AND SEXES.
  B. "DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP" SHALL MEAN A DIVERSE SET OF SKILLS RELATED TO
 CURRENT TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEDIA, INCLUDING THE NORMS OF APPROPRIATE,
 RESPONSIBLE, AND HEALTHY BEHAVIOR AND FOCUSES ON EMPOWERING LEARNERS  TO
 USE  ONLINE  RESOURCES,  APPLICATIONS, AND SPACES TO IMPROVE COMMUNITIES
 AND CURATE A POSITIVE AND EFFECTIVE DIGITAL FOOTPRINT.
  C. "MEDIA LITERACY" SHALL MEAN THE ABILITY TO USE MEDIA AND TO ACCESS,
 ANALYZE, EVALUATE, CREATE, AND ACT USING ALL FORMS OF COMMUNICATION  AND
 ENCOMPASSES THE FOUNDATIONAL SKILLS THAT LEAD TO DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP.
  2.  The  regents shall ensure that the course of instruction in grades
 kindergarten through twelve includes a component on  civility,  citizen-
 ship, and character education. Such component shall instruct students on
 the  principles  of  honesty,  tolerance,  personal  responsibility, AND
 respect for others, with an emphasis on discouraging acts of harassment,
 bullying, discrimination, observance of laws and rules, courtesy, digni-
 ty, and other traits which will enhance the quality of their experiences
 in, and contributions to, the community. Such  component  shall  include
 instruction  of  safe,  responsible  use  of the internet and electronic
 communications. The regents shall  determine  how  to  incorporate  such
 component  in  existing  curricula and the commissioner shall promulgate
 any regulations needed to carry out such determination of  the  regents.
 [For the purposes of this section, "tolerance," "respect for others" and
 "dignity"  shall include awareness and sensitivity to harassment, bully-
 ing, discrimination and civility in the relations of people of different
 races, weights, national origins, ethnic  groups,  religions,  religious
 practices,  mental  or physical abilities, sexual orientations, genders,
 and sexes.]
  3. THE REGENTS, IN CONJUNCTION WITH  THE  COMMISSIONER,  SHALL  ENSURE
 THAT  THE  COURSE  OF  INSTRUCTION IN GRADES KINDERGARTEN THROUGH TWELVE
 INCLUDES A COMPONENT ON MEDIA LITERACY.  SUCH  COMPONENT  SHALL  INCLUDE
 INSTRUCTION OF INTERNET SAFETY, CIVILITY, AND DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP WITH A
 FOCUS  ON  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF SAFE, RESPONSIBLE USE OF THE INTERNET AND
 ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS. THE BOARDS OF EDUCATION AND TRUSTEES  OF  THE
 CITIES AND SCHOOL DISTRICTS OF THE STATE SHALL REQUIRE INSTRUCTION TO BE
 GIVEN IN MEDIA LITERACY BY THE TEACHERS EMPLOYED IN THE SCHOOLS THEREIN.
 IF AVAILABLE, INSTRUCTION IN MEDIA LITERACY SHALL BE PROVIDED BY LIBRARY
 MEDIA SPECIALISTS EMPLOYED BY THE SCHOOLS THEREIN.
 A. 5318--A  7
 
  4.  THE  COMMISSIONER, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE REGENTS, SHALL INCORPO-
 RATE  EXISTING  STATE  MEDIA  LITERACY  STANDARDS  INTO  THE  COMPONENT
 DESCRIBED  IN  SUBDIVISION  TWO  OF  THIS SECTION AND CREATE A CLEAR AND
 COHERENT SET OF MEDIA LITERACY EDUCATION STANDARDS, WHICH SHALL INCLUDE,
 BUT  NOT BE LIMITED TO, THE FOLLOWING SKILLS, EXPERIENCES, AND COMPETEN-
 CIES:
  A. READING EXPERIENCES BALANCED BETWEEN LITERATURE  AND  INFORMATIONAL
 TEXTS, WHICH INCLUDE BOTH PRINT AND DIGITAL SOURCES;
  B.  INTEGRATION AND EVALUATION OF CONTENT AND INFORMATION PRESENTED IN
 DIVERSE MEDIA AND FORMATS, INCLUDING VISUAL, QUANTITATIVE, AND ORAL;
  C. USE OF TECHNOLOGY AND DIGITAL TOOLS, INCLUDING  THE  INTERNET,  FOR
 WRITING AND DRAWING TO INCREASE LEARNING AND COMMUNICATION AND TO INTER-
 ACT AND COLLABORATE WITH OTHERS;
  D.  WRITING OF INFORMATIVE AND EXPLANATORY TEXTS TO EXAMINE AND CONVEY
 COMPLEX IDEAS AND INFORMATION CLEARLY AND ACCURATELY THROUGH THE  EFFEC-
 TIVE  SELECTION, ORGANIZATION, AND ANALYSIS OF CONTENT, INCLUDING MULTI-
 MEDIA;
  E. STRATEGIC USE OF DIGITAL  MEDIA  AND  VISUAL  DISPLAYS  TO  EXPRESS
 INFORMATION AND ENHANCE UNDERSTANDING OF PRESENTATIONS;
  F.  THE  ABILITY  TO  ASSESS  HOW  POINT OF VIEW OR PURPOSE SHAPES THE
 CONTENT AND STYLE OF A TEXT, DRAWING ON  A  WIDE  RANGE  OF  GLOBAL  AND
 DIVERSE TEXTS;
  G. GATHERING OF RELEVANT INFORMATION FROM MULTIPLE SOURCES AND ASSESS-
 ING  THE  CREDIBILITY  AND  ACCURACY OF SUCH SOURCES, FOR THE PURPOSE OF
 INTEGRATING SUCH INFORMATION IN WRITING WITHOUT PLAGIARIZING;
  H. EFFECTIVELY COMMUNICATING CONCLUSIONS AND  TAKING  INFORMED  ACTION
 BASED ON SUCH CONCLUSIONS;
  I.  THE  ABILITY  TO  CREATE, PRODUCE, RESPOND, INTERPRET, AND CONNECT
 WITH ARTISTIC WORK AND TECHNIQUES;
  J. MANAGING INFORMATION WITH A FOCUS ON THE ABILITY TO ACCESS AND  USE
 INFORMATION OBTAINED FROM OTHER PEOPLE, COMMUNITY RESOURCES, AND COMPUT-
 ER  NETWORKS  AND USING TECHNOLOGY TO ACQUIRE, ORGANIZE, AND COMMUNICATE
 INFORMATION BY ENTERING, MODIFYING, RETRIEVING, AND STORING DATA;
  K. DEMONSTRATION OF DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP BY MAINTAINING  ETHICAL  DECI-
 SION  MAKING  AND BEHAVIOR AND AVOID THE SPREAD OF MISINFORMATION IN THE
 EXCHANGE AND USE OF INFORMATION;
  L. USE OF DIGITAL TOOLS TO COMMUNICATE AND WORK WITH OTHERS  TO  BUILD
 KNOWLEDGE, CONVEY IDEAS, LEARN WITH OTHERS, CREATE AND REVISE COLLABORA-
 TIVE PRODUCTS, SUPPORT INDIVIDUAL LEARNING, AND CONTRIBUTE TO THE LEARN-
 ING OF OTHERS;
  M.  USE  OF  DIGITAL  TOOLS  TO CREATE AND REVISE SIMPLE, COMPLEX, AND
 MULTIMEDIA DIGITAL ARTIFACTS;
  N. IDENTIFICATION OF WAYS OTHER PEOPLE PUT THEIR OWN INFORMATION  INTO
 ONLINE SPACES;
  O. THE ABILITY TO EXPLAIN HOW ACTIONS IN ONLINE SPACES CAN HAVE CONSE-
 QUENCES  IN  OTHER  SPACES AND THE CONNECTION BETWEEN THE PERSISTENCE OF
 DATA ON THE INTERNET, PERSONAL ONLINE IDENTITY, AND PERSONAL PRIVACY;
  P. ACTIVELY MANAGING DIGITAL PRESENCE AND DIGITAL FOOTPRINT TO REFLECT
 AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE PERMANENCE AND POTENTIAL CONSEQUENCES OF ACTIONS
 IN ONLINE SPACES;
  Q. DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING STRATEGIES THAT SUPPORT SAFETY AND SECU-
 RITY OF DIGITAL INFORMATION, PERSONAL IDENTITY, PROPERTY,  AND  PHYSICAL
 AND MENTAL HEALTH WHEN OPERATING IN THE DIGITAL WORLD;
  R.  IDENTIFYING  TYPES  OF  CYBERBULLYING AND DEVELOPING STRATEGIES TO
 COMBAT CYBERBULLYING AND HARASSMENT; AND
 A. 5318--A  8

  S. ANY ADDITIONAL MEDIA LITERACY STANDARDS OUTLINED IN  STATE  DEPART-
 MENT PUBLICATIONS OR IN THE CODES, RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE STATE OF
 NEW YORK, AS DEEMED NECESSARY.
  5. THE COMMISSIONER, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE REGENTS, SHALL UPDATE THE
 NEW  YORK  STATE  PROFESSIONAL  TEACHING  STANDARDS TO INCORPORATE MEDIA
 LITERACY AND EDUCATE LIBRARY MEDIA SPECIALISTS AND TEACHERS ON THE RELE-
 VANT STANDARDS OF MEDIA LITERACY SO THAT LIBRARY MEDIA  SPECIALISTS  AND
 TEACHERS  CAN  EFFECTIVELY INCORPORATE SUCH STANDARDS INTO THEIR CURRIC-
 ULUMS.
  6. THE COMMISSIONER, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE REGENTS,  SHALL  ANNUALLY
 REVIEW  THE MEDIA LITERACY STANDARDS SET FORTH IN THIS SECTION TO ENSURE
 SUCH STANDARDS CAPTURE THE FULL RANGE OF SKILLS, EXPERIENCES, AND COMPE-
 TENCIES THAT RESEARCH INDICATES IS NECESSARY  FOR  MEDIA  LITERACY,  AND
 SHALL UPDATE SUCH STANDARDS AS NECESSARY.
  7.  THE MEDIA LITERACY STANDARDS SET FORTH IN THIS SECTION SHALL SERVE
 AS AN OVERVIEW OF THE STATE'S INTERDISCIPLINARY APPROACH TO MEDIA LITER-
 ACY EDUCATION AND SHALL EMPHASIZE THE IMPORTANCE OF MEDIA  LITERACY  FOR
 CIVIC READINESS.
  § 7. Subdivision 1 of section 2801 of the education law, as amended by
 chapter 402 of the laws of 2005, is amended to read as follows:
  1.  A.  For  purposes of this section, [school property] THE FOLLOWING
 TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  (I) "SCHOOL PROPERTY" means:
  (A) in or within any  building,  structure,  athletic  playing  field,
 playground,  parking  lot,  or  land  contained within the real property
 boundary line of a public elementary or secondary school; or
  (B) in or on a school bus, as defined in section one hundred forty-two
 of the vehicle and traffic law[; and a school function shall mean].
  (II) "SCHOOL FUNCTION" MEANS a school-sponsored  or  school-authorized
 [extra-curricular]  EXTRA  CURRICULAR  event  or activity, regardless of
 where such event or activity takes place, including any event or  activ-
 ity that may take place in another state.
  B.  THIS  SECTION SHALL ALSO APPLY TO CYBERBULLYING, WHETHER ON OR OFF
 SCHOOL PROPERTY OR AT OR AWAY FROM A SCHOOL FUNCTION.
  § 8. Subdivision 2 of section 3006-a of the education law, as added by
 section 2 of subpart C of part EE of chapter 56 of the laws of 2015,  is
 amended and a new subdivision 4 is added to read as follows:
  2.  a. During each five-year registration period beginning on or after
 July first, two thousand sixteen, an applicant  for  registration  shall
 successfully  complete  a  minimum  of  one  hundred hours of continuing
 teacher and leader  education,  as  defined  by  the  commissioner.  The
 department  shall  issue  rigorous  standards for courses, programs, and
 activities, that shall qualify as continuing teacher and  leader  educa-
 tion  pursuant  to  this  section.  For purposes of this section, a peer
 review teacher, or a principal acting as an independent  trained  evalu-
 ator,  conducting  a classroom observation as part of the teacher evalu-
 ation system pursuant to section three thousand twelve-d of this article
 may credit such time towards his or her continuing  teacher  and  leader
 effectiveness requirements.
  b.  DURING EACH FIVE-YEAR REGISTRATION PERIOD BEGINNING ON OR AFTER A
 DATE WHICH SHALL BE DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER, ANY TEACHER  WHO  IS
 AN  APPLICANT  FOR REGISTRATION SHALL SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE A MINIMUM OF
 FIVE HOURS OF PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RELATED TO MEDIA LITERACY  EDUCA-
 TION  AND  ANY  LIBRARY  MEDIA  SPECIALIST  SHALL  COMPLETE A MINIMUM OF
 FIFTEEN HOURS OF PROFESSIONAL  DEVELOPMENT  RELATED  TO  MEDIA  LITERACY
 EDUCATION,  AS  DEFINED BY THE COMMISSIONER.  SUCH PROFESSIONAL DEVELOP-
 A. 5318--A  9

 MENT RELATED TO MEDIA LITERACY EDUCATION SHALL BE COUNTED TOWARD THE ONE
 HUNDRED HOURS OF CONTINUING TEACHER AND  LEADER  EDUCATION  REQUIRED  BY
 PARAGRAPH A OF THIS SUBDIVISION. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL REQUIRE THAT:
  (I)  PROFESSIONAL  DEVELOPMENT  RELATED  TO  MEDIA  LITERACY EDUCATION
 INCORPORATES THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES OF THE DEPARTMENT'S CULTURALLY
 RESPONSIVE-SUSTAINING FRAMEWORK;
  (II) PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RELATED TO MEDIA LITERACY  EDUCATION  IS
 PROVIDED  BY  OR  IN  COORDINATION WITH A LIBRARY MEDIA SPECIALIST OR AN
 EMPLOYEE FROM  A  SCHOOL  DISTRICT'S  LIBRARY  SYSTEM  IN  EVERY  SCHOOL
 DISTRICT;
  (III)  LIBRARY  MEDIA  SPECIALISTS  IN  EVERY  SCHOOL DISTRICT RECEIVE
 SPECIFIC TRAINING IN HOW TO PROVIDE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RELATED  TO
 MEDIA  LITERACY  EDUCATION  TO  TEACHERS OF ALL GRADE LEVELS AND SUBJECT
 AREAS CONTAINED IN THEIR SCHOOLS, WHICH SHALL INCLUDE INSTRUCTION ON HOW
 TO EFFECTIVELY INTEGRATE MEDIA LITERACY EDUCATION  INTO  SUCH  TEACHERS'
 CURRICULA; AND
  (IV)  THE DEPARTMENT CREATES AND PROVIDES MODEL CURRICULA AND TEACHING
 AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RESOURCES WHICH INCORPORATE MEDIA  LITERACY
 EDUCATION ON ITS WEBSITE.
  C.  DURING  EACH FIVE-YEAR REGISTRATION PERIOD BEGINNING ON OR AFTER A
 DATE WHICH SHALL BE DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER, ANY TEACHER  WHO  IS
 AN  APPLICANT  FOR REGISTRATION SHALL SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE A MINIMUM OF
 FIVE HOURS OF PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RELATED TO ARTICLES TWO AND TWO-A
 OF THIS CHAPTER. SUCH PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT SHALL BE  COUNTED  TOWARD
 THE  ONE  HUNDRED  HOURS  OF  CONTINUING  TEACHER  AND  LEADER EDUCATION
 REQUIRED BY PARAGRAPH A OF  THIS  SUBDIVISION.  THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL
 REQUIRE THAT:
  (I) PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RELATED TO ARTICLES TWO AND TWO-A OF THIS
 CHAPTER  INCORPORATES  THE  PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES OF THE DEPARTMENT'S
 CULTURALLY RESPONSIVE-SUSTAINING FRAMEWORK;
  (II) PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RELATED TO ARTICLES  TWO  AND  TWO-A  OF
 THIS  CHAPTER  IS PROVIDED BY OR IN COORDINATION WITH A TEACHER OR GUID-
 ANCE COUNSELOR IN EVERY SCHOOL DISTRICT; AND
  (III) THE DEPARTMENT CREATES AND PROVIDES MODEL CURRICULA AND TEACHING
 AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RESOURCES WHICH INCORPORATE THE  PRINCIPLES
 AND  PRACTICES  ARTICULATED IN ARTICLES TWO AND TWO-A OF THIS CHAPTER ON
 ITS WEBSITE.
  D. Nothing in this section shall limit the  ability  of  local  school
 districts to agree pursuant to collective bargaining to additional hours
 of  professional  development  or continuing teacher or leader education
 above the minimum requirements set forth in this section.
  [c.] E. A certified individual who has not  satisfied  the  continuing
 teacher  and  leader  education requirements shall not be issued a five-
 year registration certificate by the department and shall  not  practice
 unless  and until a registration or conditional registration certificate
 is issued as provided in subdivision three of this section. For purposes
 of this subdivision, "continuing teacher and leader  education  require-
 ments" shall mean activities designed to improve the teacher or leader's
 pedagogical  and/or  leadership  skills,  targeted  at improving student
 performance, including but not limited to formal continuing teacher  and
 leader  education  activities. Such activities shall promote the profes-
 sionalization of teaching and be closely aligned to district  goals  for
 student  performance  which meet the standards prescribed by regulations
 of the commissioner. To fulfill the continuing teacher and leader educa-
 tion requirement, programs must be taken from sponsors approved  by  the
 A. 5318--A  10
 
 department,  which shall include but not be limited to school districts,
 pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner.
  4.  FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "LIBRARY MEDIA SPECIALIST" SHALL
 MEAN AN INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYED BY A SCHOOL  DISTRICT  AS  A  LIBRARY  MEDIA
 SPECIALIST  PURSUANT  TO SECTION 91.2 OF TITLE EIGHT OF THE CODES, RULES
 AND REGULATIONS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
  § 9. The sum of fifteen million  dollars  ($15,000,000),  or  so  much
 thereof as may be necessary, is hereby appropriated to the department of
 education out of moneys in the state treasury in the general fund to the
 credit  of  the  state purposes account, not otherwise appropriated, and
 made immediately  available,  for  the  purposes  of  carrying  out  the
 provisions  of this act. Five million dollars ($5,000,000) of such funds
 shall be used for purposes including, but not limited to,  the  develop-
 ment  and distribution of teacher trainings, model lessons, and continu-
 ing education classes. Five million dollars ($5,000,000) of  such  funds
 shall  be  used for purposes including, but not limited to, the develop-
 ment and implementation of media literacy standards, teacher  trainings,
 and  continuing  professional  development.  Five  million  dollars
 ($5,000,000) of such funds shall be used for purposes including, but not
 limited to, the development and distribution of policies, standards, and
 trainings related to suicide prevention. Such moneys shall be payable on
 the audit and warrant of the state comptroller on vouchers certified  or
 approved  by  the  commissioner  of  the  department of education in the
 manner prescribed by law.
  § 10. This act shall take effect immediately.