# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Corporal Derick Franklin Brinckerhoff Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** A5315AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Anil Beephan Jr.
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A5315AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5315AA)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system in the town of Fishkill, Dutchess county as the "Corporal Derick Franklin Brinckerhoff Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5315--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 7, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. BEEPHAN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Transportation -- committee discharged, bill  amended,  ordered
  reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "Corporal Derick Franklin Brinckerhoff
  Memorial Highway"
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 345-b to
 read as follows:
  ยง 345-B. PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED  AS  THE
 "CORPORAL  DERICK  FRANKLIN  BRINCKERHOFF  MEMORIAL  HIGHWAY".  ALL THAT
 PORTION OF STATE ROUTE EIGHTY-TWO IN THE TOWN  OF  FISHKILL,  COUNTY  OF
 DUTCHESS, SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS THE "CORPORAL DERICK FRANKLIN
 BRINCKERHOFF MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".
  ยง  2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the instal-
 lation and maintenance of adequate signing of the state  highway  system
 as  designated  pursuant  to section one of this act.  However, to avoid
 confusion and to limit any possible disruption of commerce,  the  desig-
 nation  called  for  pursuant to section one of this act shall be one of
 ceremonial nature and the official name of such  highway  shall  not  be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08941-02-3