# Permits the village justice of the village of Maybrook, Orange county, to reside outside of the Village boundaries

**Bill ID:** A5355
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Brian Maher
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [A5355 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5355)

## Summary

Permits the village justice of the village of Maybrook, Orange county, to reside outside of the Village boundaries but within the town of Montgomery or the town of Hamptonburgh.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5355
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 7, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. MAHER -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Local Governments
 
 AN ACT to amend the village law and the public officers law, in relation
  to permitting village justices of the village of Maybrook to  live  in
  the towns of Montgomery or Hamptonburgh

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 3-300 of the village law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 33 to read as follows:
  33. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER OR ANY OTHER GENER-
 AL LAW, LOCAL LAW, ORDINANCE, OR SPECIAL ACT, THE VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUS-
 TEES OF THE INCORPORATED VILLAGE OF MAYBROOK,  ORANGE  COUNTY,  MAY,  BY
 RESOLUTION,  PROVIDE  THAT THE OFFICE OF VILLAGE JUSTICE OF SUCH VILLAGE
 MAY BE HELD BY A PERSON WHO IS NOT A RESIDENT OF SUCH VILLAGE,  PROVIDED
 THAT  SUCH  PERSON  RESIDES  WITHIN EITHER THE TOWN OF MONTGOMERY OR THE
 TOWN OF HAMPTONBURGH WITHIN ORANGE COUNTY.
  ยง 2. Section 3 of the public officers law is amended by adding  a  new
 subdivision 73 to read as follows:
  73.  IN  THE  VILLAGE  OF  MAYBROOK,  IN  THE  COUNTY  OF  ORANGE, THE
 PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION REQUIRING A PERSON TO BE A  RESIDENT  OF  THE
 POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE FOR WHICH HE
 OR SHE SHALL BE CHOSEN OR WITHIN WHICH HIS OR HER OFFICIAL FUNCTIONS ARE
 REQUIRED  TO  BE  EXERCISED, SHALL NOT PREVENT A PERSON FROM HOLDING THE
 OFFICE OF VILLAGE JUSTICE OF THE VILLAGE OF MAYBROOK, PROVIDED THAT SUCH
 PERSON RESIDES IN THE TOWN OF MONTGOMERY OR THE  TOWN  OF  HAMPTONBURGH.
 PROVIDED,  HOWEVER,  THE  PERSON  PERFORMING  THE  FUNCTIONS  OF VILLAGE
 JUSTICE IN ANY OTHER VILLAGE SHALL BE A RESIDENT OF SUCH VILLAGE  UNLESS
 OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY AN ACT OF THE STATE LEGISLATURE.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07836-01-3