# Relates to establishing the animal abuse hotline

**Bill ID:** A5405
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Karl Brabenec
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5405 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5405)

## Summary

Establishes the animal abuse hotline.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5405
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 10, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. BRABENEC -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  executive  law, in relation to establishing the
  animal abuse hotline
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  The executive law is amended by adding a new section 63-e
 to read as follows:
  ยง 63-E. ANIMAL ABUSE HOTLINE. 1. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL  ESTABLISH
 A  TWENTY-FOUR  HOUR  ANIMAL ABUSE HOTLINE. THE HOTLINE SHALL BE A TOLL-
 FREE NUMBER. THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  MAY  DESIGNATE  A  NON-GOVERNMENTAL
 ORGANIZATION SPECIALIZING IN ANIMAL PROTECTION TO ADMINISTER THE HOTLINE
 ESTABLISHED  PURSUANT  TO  THE  SECTION. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL TAKE
 REASONABLE EFFORTS TO INFORM THE  PUBLIC  OF  THE  AVAILABILITY  OF  THE
 HOTLINE.
  2.  WHEN  ANY ALLEGATION THAT COULD REASONABLY CONSTITUTE A REPORTABLE
 INCIDENT IS RECEIVED BY THE HOTLINE, THE HOTLINE SHALL ACCEPT AND  IMME-
 DIATELY  TRANSMIT  NOTICE OF THE REPORT ORALLY AND ELECTRONICALLY TO ANY
 APPROPRIATE STATE AGENCIES, LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OR  NON-GOVERN-
 MENTAL ORGANIZATION SPECIALIZING IN ANIMAL PROTECTION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation of this act on its effective date are authorized to be  made  and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08890-01-3