# Relates to primary social security retirement benefits for members of the New York city fire department pension fund

**Bill ID:** A5480BB
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Stacey Pheffer Amato
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5480BB PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5480BB)

## Summary

Relates to primary social security retirement benefits for certain members; provides that in the computation of the normal service retirement benefit of members of the New York city fire department pension fund, there shall be no reduction for the primary social security retirement benefit.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5480--B
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. PHEFFER AMATO, BURDICK, DICKENS -- read once and
  referred to the Committee on Governmental Employees -- recommitted  to
  the  Committee  on  Governmental Employees in accordance with Assembly
  Rule  3,  sec.  2  --  committee  discharged,  bill  amended,  ordered
  reprinted  as  amended  and  recommitted  to  said  committee -- again
  reported from said committee with  amendments,  ordered  reprinted  as
  amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the retirement and social security law, in relation to
  primary social security retirement benefits  for  police/fire  members
  who are members of the New York city fire department pension fund
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 505 of the retirement and social security  law,  as
 amended  by  chapter  18  of  the  laws  of  2012, is amended to read as
 follows:
  § 505. Service retirement benefits; police/fire members, New York city
 uniformed correction/sanitation revised plan  members  and  investigator
 revised  plan  members.  a.  The  normal  service retirement benefit for
 police/fire  members,  New  York  city  uniformed  correction/sanitation
 revised  plan  members  and  investigator revised plan members at normal
 retirement age shall be a pension equal to fifty percent of final  aver-
 age salary, less fifty percent of the primary social security retirement
 benefit commencing at age sixty-two, as provided in section five hundred
 eleven  of  this article, PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT THE COMPUTATION OF THE
 NORMAL SERVICE RETIREMENT BENEFIT OF MEMBERS OF THE NEW YORK  CITY  FIRE
 DEPARTMENT  PENSION  FUND,  SHALL  NOT  BE REDUCED BY THE PRIMARY SOCIAL
 SECURITY RETIREMENT BENEFIT COMMENCING AT AGE SIXTY-TWO AS  PROVIDED  IN
 SECTION FIVE HUNDRED ELEVEN OF THIS ARTICLE.
  b.  The  early service retirement benefit for police/fire members, New
 York city  uniformed  correction/sanitation  revised  plan  members  and
 investigator  revised  plan  members shall be a pension equal to two and
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07867-08-4
 A. 5480--B  2
 
 one-tenths percent of final  average  salary  times  years  of  credited
 service  at the completion of twenty years of service or upon attainment
 of age sixty-two, increased by one-third of one percent of final average
 salary  for  each month of service in excess of twenty years, but not in
 excess of fifty percent of final average salary, less fifty  percent  of
 the  primary social security retirement benefit commencing at age sixty-
 two as  provided  in  section  five  hundred  eleven  of  this  article,
 provided,  however, that New York city police/fire revised plan members,
 New York city uniformed correction/sanitation revised plan  members  and
 investigator  revised  plan  members shall not be eligible to retire for
 service prior to the attainment of twenty years of credited service, AND
 PROVIDED FURTHER THAT THE EARLY SERVICE RETIREMENT BENEFIT OF MEMBERS OF
 THE NEW YORK CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT PENSION FUND SHALL NOT BE  REDUCED  BY
 THE  PRIMARY SOCIAL SECURITY RETIREMENT BENEFIT COMMENCING AT AGE SIXTY-
 TWO AS PROVIDED BY SECTION FIVE HUNDRED ELEVEN OF THIS ARTICLE.
  c.  A  police/fire  member,  a  New  York  city  uniformed
 correction/sanitation  revised  plan  member  or an investigator revised
 plan member who retires with twenty-two years  of  credited  service  or
 less may become eligible for annual escalation of the service retirement
 benefit  if  [he  elects]  THEY ELECT to have the payment of [his] THEIR
 benefit commence on the date [he] THEY would have  completed  twenty-two
 years  and  one  month  or  more  of service. In such event, the service
 retirement benefit shall equal two percent of final average  salary  for
 each  year of credited service, less fifty percent of the primary social
 security retirement benefit commencing at age sixty-two as  provided  in
 section five hundred eleven of this article, PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT THE
 SERVICE  RETIREMENT BENEFIT OF MEMBERS OF THE NEW YORK CITY FIRE DEPART-
 MENT PENSION FUND SHALL NOT BE REDUCED BY THE  PRIMARY  SOCIAL  SECURITY
 RETIREMENT  BENEFIT  COMMENCING  AT AGE SIXTY-TWO AS PROVIDED BY SECTION
 FIVE HUNDRED ELEVEN OF THIS ARTICLE.
  § 2. Section 511 of the retirement and social security law is  amended
 by adding a new subdivision h to read as follows:
  H.  NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISION OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY, THIS SECTION
 SHALL NOT APPLY TO MEMBERS OF THE NEW YORK CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT  PENSION
 FUND  WHO  RECEIVE A SERVICE RETIREMENT BENEFIT PURSUANT TO SECTION FIVE
 HUNDRED FIVE OF THIS ARTICLE OR A DEFERRED VESTED  BENEFIT  PURSUANT  TO
 SECTION FIVE HUNDRED SIXTEEN OF THIS ARTICLE.
  § 3. Subdivision c of section 516 of the retirement and social securi-
 ty law, as amended by chapter 18 of the laws of 2012, is amended to read
 as follows:
  c.  The  deferred vested benefit of police/fire members, New York city
 police/fire  revised  plan  members,  New  York  city  uniformed
 correction/sanitation  revised plan members or investigator revised plan
 members shall be a pension commencing at early retirement age  equal  to
 two  and one-tenths percent of final average salary times years of cred-
 ited service, less fifty percent of the primary social security  retire-
 ment  benefit  commencing  at age sixty-two, as provided in section five
 hundred eleven of this article, PROVIDED HOWEVER THAT THE DEFERRED VEST-
 ED BENEFIT OF MEMBERS OF THE NEW YORK CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT PENSION  FUND
 AND  REVISED  PLAN  MEMBERS  WHO  ARE  MEMBERS OF THE NEW YORK CITY FIRE
 DEPARTMENT PENSION FUND SHALL NOT BE REDUCED BY THE PRIMARY SOCIAL SECU-
 RITY RETIREMENT BENEFIT COMMENCING  AT  AGE  SIXTY-TWO  AS  PROVIDED  BY
 SECTION FIVE HUNDRED ELEVEN OF THIS ARTICLE. A police/fire member, a New
 York  city  police/fire  revised  plan member, a New York city uniformed
 correction/sanitation revised plan member or investigator  revised  plan
 member  may  elect  to  receive [his] THEIR vested benefit commencing at
 A. 5480--B  3
 
 early retirement age or age fifty-five. If the vested benefit  commences
 before  early  retirement  age, the benefit shall be reduced by one-fif-
 teenth for each year, if any, that the member's early retirement age  is
 in excess of age sixty, and by one-thirtieth for each additional year by
 which  the  vested  benefit  commences prior to early retirement age. If
 such vested benefit is deferred until after such member's normal retire-
 ment age, the benefit shall be computed and subject to annual escalation
 in the same manner as provided for an early retirement benefit  pursuant
 to subdivision c of section five hundred five of this article.
  §  4. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 13-379 of the adminis-
 trative code of the city of New York, the provisions of this  act  shall
 apply  to  chapter three of title thirteen of the administrative code of
 the city of New York.
  § 5. This act shall take effect immediately.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  SUMMARY: This proposed legislation would amend Sections of the Retire-
 ment and Social Security Law (RSSL) to eliminate the offset equal to 50%
 of the primary social security benefit in the  service,  early  service,
 and  vested  retirement benefits for Tier 3 members of the New York City
 Fire Pension Fund (FIRE).
 
  EXPECTED INCREASE (DECREASE) IN EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS
  by Fiscal Year for the first 25 years ($ in Millions)
 
  Year  FIRE
  2025  8.3
  2026  9.0
  2027  9.8
  2028  10.6
  2029  11.5
  2030  12.4
  2031  13.4
  2032  14.4
  2033  15.4
  2034  16.5
  2035  17.6
  2036  18.7
  2037  19.9
  2038  21.1
  2039  22.3
  2040  23.5
  2041  24.8
  2042  26.0
  2043  24.5
  2044  25.7
  2045  26.9
  2046  28.1
  2047  29.2
  2048  30.4
  2049  31.5
 
  Employer Contribution impact beyond Fiscal Year 2049 is not shown.
  Projected contributions include future new hires that may be impacted.
 
  The entire increase in employer contributions will be allocated to New
 York City.
 A. 5480--B  4
 
  EXPECTED INCREASE (DECREASE) IN ACTUARIAL LIABILITIES
  as of June 30, 2023 ($ in Millions)

 Present Value (PV)  FIRE
 PV of Benefits:  117.4
 PV of Employee Contributions:  0.0
 PV of Employer Contributions:  117.4
 Unfunded Accrued Liabilities:  26.5
 
  AMORTIZATION OF UNFUNDED ACCRUED LIABILITY
 
  FIRE
 Number of Payments:  18
 Fiscal Year of Last Payment:  2042
 Amortization Payment:  2.7 M
 
  Unfunded  Accrued Liability increases were amortized over the expected
 remaining working lifetime of those  impacted  by  the  benefit  changes
 using level dollar payments.
  CENSUS  DATA:  The estimates presented herein are based on preliminary
 census data collected as of June 30,  2023.  The  census  data  for  the
 impacted population is summarized below.

  FIRE
 Active Members
 - Number Count:  5,030
 - Average Age:  33.5
 - Average Service:  5.5
 - Average Salary:  112,400
 Term. Vested Members
 - Number Count:  9
 - Average Age:  37.6
 
  IMPACT  ON  MEMBER  BENEFITS: Currently, Tier 3 normal service retire-
 ment, early service  retirement,  and  vested  retirement  benefits  are
 subject to an offset equal to 50% of the primary social security benefit
 as defined in RSSL Section 511 beginning at age 62.
  Under  the proposed legislation, the offset for such benefits would be
 eliminated for FIRE members, resulting in an increase in benefits.
  ASSUMPTIONS AND METHODS: The  estimates  presented  herein  have  been
 calculated  based  on the Revised 2021 Actuarial Assumptions and Methods
 of the impacted retirement systems. In addition:
  * New entrants were assumed to replace exiting members so  that  total
 payroll increases by 3% each year for impacted groups. New entrant demo-
 graphics were developed based on data for recent new hires and actuarial
 judgement.
  RISK  AND  UNCERTAINTY: The costs presented in this Fiscal Note depend
 highly on the actuarial assumptions, methods,  and  models  used,  demo-
 graphics  of  the  impacted population and other factors such as invest-
 ment, contribution, and other risks. If actual experience deviates  from
 actuarial  assumptions,  the  actual  costs  could  differ  from  those
 presented herein. Quantifying these risks is beyond the  scope  of  this
 Fiscal Note.
  This  Fiscal  Note  is intended to measure pension-related impacts and
 does not include other potential costs (e.g., administrative  and  Other
 Postemployment Benefits).
 A. 5480--B  5
 
  This Fiscal Note does not include cost analyses relating to provisions
 contained in RSSL Section 500(c).
  STATEMENT OF ACTUARIAL OPINION: Marek Tyszkiewicz and Gregory Zelikov-
 sky  are members of the Society of Actuaries and the American Academy of
 Actuaries. We are members of NYCERS but do not believe  it  impairs  our
 objectivity  and  we  meet  the  Qualification Standards of the American
 Academy of Actuaries to render the actuarial opinion  contained  herein.
 To  the  best  of  our knowledge, the results contained herein have been
 prepared in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles  and
 procedures  and  with  the Actuarial Standards of Practice issued by the
 Actuarial Standards Board.
  FISCAL NOTE IDENTIFICATION: This Fiscal Note 2024-03 dated January 26,
 2024 was prepared by the Chief Actuary for the New York City  Retirement
 Systems and Pension Funds. This estimate is intended for use only during
 the 2024 Legislative Session.