# Requires the notification of individuals that certain work-study, internship, externship or other work placements meet the work requirements of title nine-B of the social services law

**Bill ID:** A5509
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Linda Rosenthal
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5509 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5509)

## Summary

Requires the notification of individuals that certain work-study, internship, externship or other work placements offered by institutions of higher education meet the work requirements of title nine-B of article five of the social services law.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5509
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 15, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. L. ROSENTHAL -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Social Services
 
 AN ACT to amend the education  law  and  the  social  services  law,  in
  relation to notifying individuals that certain work-study, internship,
  externship  or other work placements offered by institutions of higher
  education meet the work requirements of title nine-B of  article  five
  of the social services law
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Part 4 of article 14 of the education  law  is  amended  by
 adding a new section 685 to read as follows:
  ยง  685.  WORK-STUDY,  INTERNSHIP, EXTERNSHIP OR OTHER WORK PLACEMENTS.
 ANY CUNY, SUNY OR OTHER DEGREE GRANTING INSTITUTION PROVIDING  WORK-STU-
 DY, INTERNSHIP, EXTERNSHIP OR OTHER WORK PLACEMENTS THAT ARE PART OF THE
 CURRICULUM  SHALL  NOTIFY  APPLICANTS ON THE APPLICATION FORMS THAT SUCH
 WORK-STUDY, INTERNSHIP, EXTERNSHIP OR OTHER  WORK  PLACEMENTS  THAT  ARE
 PART  OF  THE  CURRICULUM  MEET THE WORK REQUIREMENTS OF TITLE NINE-B OF
 ARTICLE FIVE OF THE SOCIAL SERVICES LAW FOR PUBLIC ASSISTANCE.
  ยง 2. The social services law is amended by adding a new section  337-a
 to read as follows:
  ยง  337-A.  NOTIFICATION  TO  APPLICANTS.  THE  DEPARTMENT SHALL NOTIFY
 APPLICANTS ON APPLICATION FORMS THAT CERTAIN CUNY, SUNY OR OTHER  DEGREE
 GRANTING  INSTITUTION  PROVIDING  WORK-STUDY,  INTERNSHIP, EXTERNSHIP OR
 OTHER WORK PLACEMENTS THAT ARE PART OF THE  CURRICULUM,  MEET  THE  WORK
 REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TITLE.
  ยง  3.  This  act  shall take effect on the sixtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00845-01-3