# Establishes the police safety equipment grant program within the division of criminal justice services and makes an appropriation therefor

**Bill ID:** A5532
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Doug Smith
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5532 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5532)

## Summary

Creates a police safety equipment grant program to provide for services and expenses related to police safety equipment; directs a sum of $30,000,000 to be appropriated to such program.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5532
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. SMITH -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Governmental Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law, in relation to  creating  the  police
  safety equipment grant program; and making an appropriation therefor
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The executive law is amended by adding a new section  839-a
 to read as follows:
  ยง  839-A.  POLICE  SAFETY  EQUIPMENT  GRANT  PROGRAM.  THERE IS HEREBY
 CREATED WITHIN THE DIVISION OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE SERVICES A POLICE SAFETY
 EQUIPMENT GRANT PROGRAM TO BE ADMINISTERED BY THE COMMISSIONER TO  AWARD
 GRANTS  TO  PROVIDE  FOR  SERVICES AND EXPENSES RELATED TO POLICE SAFETY
 EQUIPMENT INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, BULLET RESISTANT VESTS, BALLIS-
 TIC VEHICLE DOOR PANELS, RIOT  SHIELDS,  CONDUCTED  ENERGY  DEVICES  AND
 PORTABLE  ELECTRONIC TABLETS.  A GRANT MAY BE AWARDED UPON SUBMISSION OF
 AN APPLICATION TO THE COMMISSIONER. SUCH APPLICATION FOR A  GRANT  SHALL
 DEMONSTRATE  A  SPECIFIC NEED FOR AN AWARD OF A GRANT TO PROVIDE PROTEC-
 TIVE EQUIPMENT FOR POLICE OFFICERS AS DEFINED IN  SECTION  1.20  OF  THE
 CRIMINAL PROCEDURE LAW.
  ยง 2. The sum of thirty million dollars ($30,000,000), or so much ther-
 eof  as  may  be  necessary, is hereby appropriated to the police safety
 equipment grant program as established pursuant to section 839-a of  the
 executive law from any moneys in the state treasury not otherwise appro-
 priated  and  made  immediately  available  to  the division of criminal
 justice services for distribution to local law enforcement agencies  for
 the  purposes  of  carrying  out the provisions of this act. Such moneys
 shall be payable on the audit and warrant of the comptroller on vouchers
 certified or approved by the commissioner of criminal  justice  services
 in the manner prescribed by law.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01038-01-3