# Designates the Montauk Point shoals as an important bird area, and directs the commissioner of environmental conservation to designate such area as part of the New York state bird conservation area program

**Bill ID:** A5550
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Fred Thiele
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [A5550 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5550)

## Summary

Designates the Montauk Point shoals as an important bird area; directs the commissioner of environmental conservation to designate such area as part of the New York state bird conservation area program.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5550
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. THIELE -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  environmental  conservation law, in relation to
  designating the Montauk Point shoals area as an  important  bird  area
  and making such area part of the New York state bird conservation area
  program

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 11-2001 of the environmental  conservation  law  is
 amended by adding a new subdivision 7 to read as follows:
  7.  A.  THE MONTAUK POINT SHOALS AREA OF THE COUNTY OF SUFFOLK, HAVING
 MET THE CRITERIA  OF  SUBDIVISION  THREE  OF  THIS  SECTION,  IS  HEREBY
 DECLARED  TO BE AN IMPORTANT BIRD AREA AND THE COMMISSIONER SHALL DESIG-
 NATE SUCH AREA AS PART OF THE NEW  YORK  STATE  BIRD  CONSERVATION  AREA
 PROGRAM.
  B.  FOR  THE PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE, "MONTAUK POINT SHOALS AREA" MEANS
 THOSE MARINE AND COASTAL AREAS OFF THE SHORE OF MONTAUK  POINT,  IN  THE
 COUNTY  OF  SUFFOLK, EXTENDING TO THE COASTAL WATERS WITHIN A SIXTY FOOT
 BATHYMETRIC CONTOUR THAT ENCOMPASSES THE AREA  BEGINNING  JUST  WEST  OF
 SHAGWONG  POINT  ON THE NORTHERN SHORE OF MONTAUK POINT, CONTINUING EAST
 AROUND MONTAUK POINT, AND TERMINATING JUST EAST OF DITCH PLAINS  ON  THE
 ATLANTIC  OCEAN  SIDE  OF MONTAUK POINT.  SUCH AREA CONSISTING OF WATERS
 THAT ARE SIXTY OR LESS FEET IN DEPTH, AND WITHIN BETWEEN THREE AND  ONE-
 HALF  TO FOUR MILES FROM THE SHORELINE.  PROVIDED, THAT THE COMMISSIONER
 SHALL BE AUTHORIZED TO CHANGE THE BOUNDARIES OF SUCH AREA, BY  RULE,  AS
 HE OR SHE SHALL DEEM NECESSARY.
  C.  THAT  PORTION OF THE NEW YORK STATE BIRD CONSERVATION AREA PROGRAM
 DESIGNATED PURSUANT TO THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL BE KNOWN AS  THE  "MONTAUK
 POINT SHOALS BIRD CONSERVATION AREA".
  D.  NOTHING  IN  THIS  SECTION  SHALL  BE DEEMED TO IMPOSE NEW FISHING
 RESTRICTIONS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the sixtieth  day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06749-01-3