# Elevates killing a police work dog or police work horse from being a class E felony to a class D felony

**Bill ID:** A5558
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Karl Brabenec
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5558 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5558)

## Summary

Elevates the offense of killing a police work dog or police work horse from being a class E felony to a class D felony; establishes the class E felony of injuring a police work dog or police work horse for intentionally causing serious physical injury to a police work dog or police work horse while such dog or horse is performing its duties under the supervision of a police officer.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5558
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. BRABENEC -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Codes
 
 AN  ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to elevating the severity of
  the felony offense of killing a police work dog or police  work  horse
  and  establishing the class E felony offense of injuring a police work
  dog or police work horse

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The closing paragraph of section 195.06-a of the penal law,
 as  added  by  chapter  162  of  the laws of 2013, is amended to read as
 follows:
  Killing a police work dog or police work horse is a class [E] D  felo-
 ny.
  ยง 2. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 195.06-b to read
 as follows:
 ยง 195.06-B INJURING A POLICE WORK DOG OR POLICE WORK HORSE.
  A  PERSON IS GUILTY OF INJURING A POLICE WORK DOG OR POLICE WORK HORSE
 WHEN SUCH PERSON INTENTIONALLY  CAUSES  SERIOUS  PHYSICAL  INJURY  TO  A
 POLICE  WORK  DOG OR POLICE WORK HORSE WHILE SUCH DOG OR HORSE IS IN THE
 PERFORMANCE OF ITS DUTIES AND UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF A POLICE OFFICER.
 FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "POLICE WORK DOG" OR "POLICE WORK  HORSE,"
 AS THE CASE MAY BE, SHALL MEAN ANY DOG OR HORSE OWNED OR HARBORED BY ANY
 STATE  OR  MUNICIPAL  POLICE  DEPARTMENT  OR  ANY  STATE  OR FEDERAL LAW
 ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, WHICH HAS BEEN TRAINED TO AID LAW ENFORCEMENT  OFFI-
 CERS AND IS ACTUALLY BEING USED FOR POLICE WORK PURPOSES.
  INJURING A POLICE WORK DOG OR POLICE WORK HORSE IS A CLASS E FELONY.
  ยง  3. This act shall take effect the first of November next succeeding
 the date on which it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04779-01-3