# Relates to penalties for promotion of a suicide attempt

**Bill ID:** A5565
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Didi Barrett
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5565 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5565)

## Summary

Provides that a person may be charged with promoting a suicide or manslaughter if he or she is convicted of endangering the welfare of a vulnerable elderly person, an incompetent or physically disabled person and the conduct was the proximate cause of the victim's suicide.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5565
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. BARRETT, SANTABARBARA, McDONOUGH -- read once and
  referred to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to penalties for promotion of
  a suicide attempt
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 120.30 of the penal  law  is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
 ยง 120.30 Promoting a suicide attempt.
  A person is guilty of promoting a suicide attempt when:
  (A)  he  OR SHE intentionally causes or aids another person to attempt
 suicide; OR
  (B) HE OR SHE ENDANGERS THE WELFARE OF AN  INCOMPETENT,  A  VULNERABLE
 ELDERLY  PERSON  OR A PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON AS SET FORTH IN SECTION
 260.25, 260.32 OR 260.34 OF THIS CHAPTER AND SUCH CONDUCT  SIGNIFICANTLY
 CONTRIBUTED TO THE VICTIM'S SUICIDE ATTEMPT.
  Promoting a suicide attempt is a class E felony.
  ยง 2. Section 125.15 of the penal law is amended to read as follows:
 ยง 125.15 Manslaughter in the second degree.
  A person is guilty of manslaughter in the second degree when:
  1. He OR SHE recklessly causes the death of another person; or
  [3.]  2.  He  OR  SHE  intentionally  causes or aids another person to
 commit suicide;
  3. HE OR SHE ENDANGERS THE WELFARE OF  AN  INCOMPETENT,  A  VULNERABLE
 ELDERLY  PERSON, OR A PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON AS SET FORTH IN SECTION
 260.25, 260.32 OR 260.34 OF THIS CHAPTER AND SUCH CONDUCT  SIGNIFICANTLY
 CONTRIBUTED TO THE VICTIM'S SUICIDE.
  Manslaughter in the second degree is a class C felony.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01443-01-3