# Relates to the sale of composting bags

**Bill ID:** A5560
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Keith Brown
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5560 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5560)

## Summary

Requires composting bags sold within the state be made of paper.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5560
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. K. BROWN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the environmental conservation law, in relation to the
  sale of composting bags
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Article 27 of the environmental conservation law is amended
 by adding a new title 34 to read as follows:
  TITLE 34
  REGULATION OF COMPOSTING BAGS
 SECTION 27-3401. DEFINITIONS.
  27-3403. REGULATION OF THE SALE OF COMPOSTING BAGS.
  27-3405. VIOLATIONS.
  27-3407. REGULATIONS.
 § 27-3401. DEFINITIONS.
  AS USED IN THIS TITLE:
  1.  "MANUFACTURER"  SHALL MEAN ANY PERSON, FIRM, ASSOCIATION, PARTNER-
 SHIP, OR CORPORATION, WHICH MAKES PLASTIC TRASH BAGS TO BE USED  IN  THE
 DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
  2.  "COMPOSTING  BAG"  SHALL  MEAN  A  BAG INTENDED TO HOLD, STORE, OR
 TRANSPORT COMPOST MATERIALS, INCLUDING BUT  NOT  LIMITED  TO  COMPOSTING
 BAGS, YARD BAGS, AND LEAF BAGS.
  3.  "COMPOST  MATERIALS"  SHALL  MEAN  LEAVES, GRASS CLIPPINGS, GARDEN
 DEBRIS, VEGETATIVE RESIDUE THAT IS RECOGNIZABLE AS PART OF  A  PLANT  OR
 VEGETABLE, SMALL OR CHIPPED BRANCHES, AND SIMILAR MATERIAL.
  4.  "RETAILER" SHALL MEAN ANY PERSON, FIRM OR CORPORATION THAT ENGAGES
 IN THE SALE OF COMPOSTING BAGS.
 § 27-3403. REGULATION OF THE SALE OF COMPOSTING BAGS.
  EVERY COMPOSTING BAG OFFERED FOR SALE OR SOLD BY A  RETAILER  IN  THIS
 STATE SHALL BE MADE FROM PAPER.
 § 27-3405. VIOLATIONS.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06709-01-3
 A. 5560  2
 
  1. ANY RETAILER FOUND TO BE IN VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE SHALL RECEIVE A
 WARNING  NOTICE  FOR  THE  FIRST VIOLATION. ANY RETAILER FOUND TO SUBSE-
 QUENTLY BE IN VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE SHALL BE SUBJECT TO A  PENALTY  OF
 FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS PER VIOLATION.
  2.  ANY MANUFACTURER FOUND IN VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE SHALL BE SUBJECT
 TO A PENALTY OF FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS PER VIOLATION.
 § 27-3407. REGULATIONS.
  THE DEPARTMENT IS AUTHORIZED TO PROMULGATE ANY RULES  AND  REGULATIONS
 NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.
  § 2. This act shall take effect January 1, 2025.