# Requires the establishment of electronics and hazardous waste recycling programs in towns within Nassau and Suffolk counties

**Bill ID:** A5567
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Keith Brown
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5567 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5567)

## Summary

Requires the establishment of electronics and hazardous waste recycling programs in towns within Nassau and Suffolk counties for one year.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5567
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. K. BROWN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Local Governments
 
 AN  ACT to amend the general municipal law, in relation to requiring the
  establishment of electronics and hazardous waste recycling programs in
  towns within Nassau and Suffolk counties; and providing for the repeal
  of such provisions upon expiration thereof
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  general  municipal  law  is  amended by adding a new
 section 120-dd to read as follows:
  ยง 120-DD. ELECTRONICS AND HAZARDOUS WASTE RECYCLING PILOT PROGRAMS. 1.
 EACH MUNICIPALITY WITHIN NASSAU AND SUFFOLK COUNTIES SHALL ADOPT A LOCAL
 LAW OR ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING AN ELECTRONICS AND HAZARDOUS WASTE RECYCL-
 ING PILOT PROGRAM WITHIN SUCH MUNICIPALITY  WITHIN  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTY
 DAYS  OF  THE  EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION. SUCH PILOT PROGRAMS SHALL
 RUN FOR NO LESS THAN ONE YEAR. SUCH PILOT PROGRAMS  SHALL  INCLUDE,  BUT
 NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (A) THE RECYCLING OF ELECTRONICS AND HAZARDOUS WASTE; AND
  (B)  A  LOCATION  FOR  RESIDENTS TO DROP OFF ELECTRONICS AND HAZARDOUS
 WASTE FOR RECYCLING WHICH IS OPEN TO RESIDENTS.
  2. WITHIN TWO YEARS OF THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION, EACH  MUNI-
 CIPALITY  WHICH  ESTABLISHED  A  PILOT  PROGRAM UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL
 SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR, THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT OF THE  SENATE,
 THE  SPEAKER OF THE ASSEMBLY, THE MINORITY LEADER OF THE SENATE, AND THE
 MINORITY LEADER OF THE ASSEMBLY WHICH SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE  LIMITED
 TO,  THE  EFFECTIVENESS  OF  THE  PILOT  PROGRAM,  HOW MUCH MATERIAL WAS
 COLLECTED AND IF IT WAS TREATED,  DISPOSED  OF,  OR  RECYCLED,  AND  THE
 NUMBER  OF  PARTICIPANTS  IN THE PILOT PROGRAM COMPARED TO THE NUMBER OF
 RESIDENTS WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately and shall  expire  and  be
 deemed repealed three years after it shall have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06307-01-3