# Requires certain businesses in which alcohol or cannabis is consumed have opioid antagonists

**Bill ID:** A5580
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Keith Brown
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5580 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5580)

## Summary

Requires retail licensees for on-premises consumption of alcohol and adult-use on-site consumption of cannabis licensees have opioid antagonists to be administered to patrons, staff or individuals on premises of such establishment.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5580
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. K. BROWN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Economic Development
 
 AN ACT to amend the alcoholic beverage control law and the cannabis law,
  in relation to requiring certain businesses in which alcohol or canna-
  bis is consumed to have opioid antagonists

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 106  of  the  alcoholic  beverage  control  law  is
 amended by adding a new subdivision 18 to read as follows:
  18.  ALL RETAIL LICENSEES FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION SHALL CONTAIN AN
 OPIOID ANTAGONIST TO BE ADMINISTERED TO PATRONS, STAFF OR INDIVIDUALS ON
 PREMISES OF SUCH ESTABLISHMENT.  FOR THE PURPOSES OF  THIS  SUBDIVISION,
 "OPIOID  ANTAGONIST"  MEANS  NALOXONE,  NARCAN  OR  ANY OTHER MEDICATION
 APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH  AND  THE  FEDERAL  FOOD  AND  DRUG
 ADMINISTRATION  THAT, WHEN ADMINISTERED, NEGATES OR NEUTRALIZES IN WHOLE
 OR IN PART THE PHARMACOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF AN OPIOID IN THE HUMAN BODY.
  ยง 2. Section 77 of the cannabis law is amended by adding a new  subdi-
 vision 15 to read as follows:
  15.  EACH  ADULT-USE  ON-SITE  CONSUMPTION  LICENSEE  SHALL CONTAIN AN
 OPIOID ANTAGONIST TO BE ADMINISTERED TO PATRONS, STAFF OR INDIVIDUALS ON
 PREMISES OF SUCH ESTABLISHMENT.  FOR THE PURPOSES OF  THIS  SUBDIVISION,
 "OPIOID  ANTAGONIST"  MEANS  NALOXONE,  NARCAN  OR  ANY OTHER MEDICATION
 APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH  AND  THE  FEDERAL  FOOD  AND  DRUG
 ADMINISTRATION  THAT, WHEN ADMINISTERED, NEGATES OR NEUTRALIZES IN WHOLE
 OR IN PART THE PHARMACOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF AN OPIOID IN THE HUMAN BODY.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06542-01-3