# Establishes a training wage equal to eighty-five percent of the state minimum wage or one hundred percent of the federal minimum wage

**Bill ID:** A5594
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** William A. Barclay
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5594 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5594)

## Summary

Establishes a training wage equal to eighty-five percent of the state minimum wage or one hundred percent of the federal minimum wage, whichever is greater, that may be paid to a youth who has no prior job experience; provides that no youth may be paid a training wage for more than one hundred eighty days.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5594
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. BARCLAY, PALMESANO, DiPIETRO, LEMONDES, DeSTEFA-
  NO, GOODELL, J. M. GIGLIO, BRABENEC -- Multi-Sponsored by -- M. of  A.
  MANKTELOW -- read once and referred to the Committee on Labor
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the labor law, in relation to establishing a training
  wage

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  652  of the labor law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 7 to read as follows:
  7. TRAINING WAGE. (A) A TRAINING WAGE EQUAL TO EIGHTY-FIVE PERCENT  OF
 THE  STATE  MINIMUM  WAGE  OR ONE HUNDRED PERCENT OF THE FEDERAL MINIMUM
 WAGE, WHICHEVER IS LESS, MAY BE PAID TO A YOUTH WHO  HAS  NO  PRIOR  JOB
 EXPERIENCE.
  (B)  ANY  YOUTH WHO RECEIVES A TRAINING WAGE PURSUANT TO PARAGRAPH (A)
 OF THIS SUBDIVISION AND WHO DID NOT WORK MORE THAN  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTY
 DAYS  IN  THE  PRECEDING  CALENDAR YEAR, SHALL RECEIVE, AT A MINIMUM, AN
 ANNUAL INCREASE IN WAGES EQUAL TO TWENTY-FIVE PERCENT OF THE  DIFFERENCE
 BETWEEN  THE TRAINING WAGE PURSUANT TO PARAGRAPH (A) OF THIS SUBDIVISION
 AND THE STATE MINIMUM WAGE UNTIL SUCH YOUTH REACHES THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN.
  (C) FOR THE PURPOSE OF THIS SUBDIVISION, YOUTH IS DEFINED AS A  PERSON
 WHO HAS NOT YET REACHED THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN, AND PRIOR JOB EXPERIENCE IS
 DEFINED AS EMPLOYMENT WHERE AN EMPLOYEE WOULD HAVE BEEN ACCOUNTED FOR ON
 AN EMPLOYER'S PAYROLL RECORDS. NO YOUTH WILL BE PAID A TRAINING WAGE FOR
 MORE  THAN  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTY  DAYS.  EMPLOYERS ARE LIMITED TO TWENTY
 PERCENT OF THEIR WORKFORCE, OR NO MORE THAN SIX  EMPLOYEES  RECEIVING  A
 TRAINING  WAGE  AT ANY ONE PARTICULAR LOCATION.  AT NO TIME WILL A YOUTH
 RECEIVING A TRAINING WAGE BE USED TO DISPLACE AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS RECEIV-
 ING A WAGE EQUAL TO OR GREATER THAN THE STATE MINIMUM WAGE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02575-01-3