# Relates to limiting the number of shelters in council districts

**Bill ID:** A5647
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Vivian Cook
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5647 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5647)

## Summary

Relates to limiting the number of shelters in council districts.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5647
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 20, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. COOK, WALKER, HYNDMAN, TAYLOR, SAYEGH, LAVINE --
  read once and referred to the Committee on Cities
 
 AN ACT to amend the administrative code of the  city  of  New  York,  in
  relation to limiting the number of shelters in council districts
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The administrative code of the city of New York is  amended
 by adding a new section 21-315.1 to read as follows:
  ยง 21-315.1 LIMITS ON SHELTER CAPACITY OF COUNCIL DISTRICTS. A. FOR THE
 PURPOSES  OF  THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING
 MEANINGS:
  1. "CAPACITY" SHALL MEAN THE NUMBER OF SHELTER BEDS PROVIDED FOR INDI-
 VIDUAL HOMELESS SINGLE ADULTS AND THE NUMBER OF SHELTER  UNITS  PROVIDED
 FOR HOMELESS ADULT FAMILIES AND FAMILIES WITH CHILDREN.
  2.  "SHELTER" SHALL MEAN TEMPORARY EMERGENCY HOUSING PROVIDED TO HOME-
 LESS ADULTS, ADULT FAMILIES, AND FAMILIES WITH CHILDREN BY  THE  DEPART-
 MENT  OR A PROVIDER UNDER CONTRACT OR SIMILAR AGREEMENT WITH THE DEPART-
 MENT.
  B.  THE DEPARTMENT SHALL LIMIT THE SHELTER CAPACITY  OF  EACH  COUNCIL
 DISTRICT  WITHIN THE CITY OF NEW YORK TO NO MORE THAN FIFTEEN PERCENT OF
 THE TOTAL SHELTER CAPACITY OF THE BOROUGH WHERE SUCH COUNCIL DISTRICT IS
 LOCATED. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL NOT RENEW ANY SHELTER CONTRACT OR  SIMILAR
 AGREEMENT IF THE COUNCIL DISTRICT WHERE SUCH SHELTER IS LOCATED HAS MORE
 THAN  FIFTEEN PERCENT OF THE TOTAL SHELTER CAPACITY OF THE BOROUGH WHERE
 SUCH COUNCIL DISTRICT IS LOCATED.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect six months after it shall have  become
 a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08230-01-3