# Provides elderly individuals water relief in N.Y. city

**Bill ID:** A5668
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Edward Braunstein
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5668 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5668)

## Summary

Provides that any qualified homeowner in the city of New York shall be eligible to be exempted from any future increases in water rate fees.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5668
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 20, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  BRAUNSTEIN  -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Cities
 
 AN ACT to amend the administrative code of the  city  of  New  York,  in
  relation  to  providing  certain elderly individuals with an exemption
  from increases in water rates
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The administrative code of the city of New York is amended
 by adding a new section 24-340 to read as follows:
  ยง 24-340 SENIOR CITIZEN WATER RATE FREEZE. A.  FOR  PURPOSES  OF  THIS
 SECTION THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  (1)  "QUALIFIED  HOMEOWNER" MEANS A PERSON WHO: (A) IS AT LEAST SIXTY-
 FIVE YEARS OF AGE; (B) OWNS REAL PROPERTY;  AND  (C)  HAS  HAD  A  TOTAL
 HOUSEHOLD INCOME OF LESS THAN FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR TWO CONSECUTIVE
 INCOME  TAX YEARS BEGINNING IN TWO THOUSAND NINETEEN, AS VERIFIED BY THE
 NEW YORK CITY DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE;
  (2) "REAL PROPERTY" MEANS A ONE, TWO, THREE, OR FOUR FAMILY HOME OWNED
 BY A QUALIFIED HOMEOWNER THAT SERVES AS THE PRIMARY  RESIDENCE  OF  SUCH
 HOMEOWNER;
  (3)  "WATER RATE INCREASE" MEANS AN INCREASE IN WATER RATES THAT TAKES
 EFFECT SUBSEQUENT TO A  QUALIFIED  HOMEOWNER'S  ELIGIBILITY  UNDER  THIS
 SECTION.
  B.  REAL  PROPERTY OWNED BY A QUALIFIED HOMEOWNER SHALL BE EXEMPT FROM
 ANY CHARGES DUE TO A WATER RATE INCREASE.
  C. THE EXEMPTION PROVIDED BY THIS SECTION MAY BE SUSPENDED FOR NO MORE
 THAN ONE CALENDAR YEAR BY THE COMMISSIONER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRON-
 MENTAL PROTECTION OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK (1) IN THE EVENT OF A DROUGHT,
 OR (2) IN THE EVENT OF A DISASTER OR  CATASTROPHE  OTHER  THAN  DROUGHT,
 WHICH  CAUSES OR MAY CAUSE AN ACTUAL AND IMMEDIATE SHORTAGE OF AVAILABLE
 AND USABLE WATER.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08305-01-3
 A. 5668  2
 
  D. ELIGIBILITY FOR THE EXEMPTION PROVIDED BY THIS  SECTION  SHALL  NOT
 PRECLUDE  A QUALIFIED HOMEOWNER'S ELIGIBILITY FOR ANY OTHER EXEMPTION OR
 CREDIT TO WHICH THEY ARE ENTITLED.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect July 1, 2025.