# Requires the office of temporary and disability assistance to establish a universal benefits form for individuals seeking public assistance

**Bill ID:** A5690
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Maritza Davila
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5690 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5690)

## Summary

Requires the office of temporary and disability assistance to establish a universal benefits form for individuals seeking public assistance.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5690
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 22, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. DAVILA -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Social Services
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the social services law, in relation to establishing a
  universal benefits form for individuals seeking public assistance
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The social services law is amended by adding a new section
 152-d to read as follows:
  ยง 152-D. UNIVERSAL  BENEFITS  FORM.  1.  NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY  OTHER
 PROVISION OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY, THE OFFICE OF TEMPORARY AND DISABILITY
 ASSISTANCE  SHALL  ESTABLISH  A UNIVERSAL APPLICATION FORM TO BE USED BY
 INDIVIDUALS APPLYING FOR PUBLIC ASSISTANCE BENEFITS. SUCH FORM SHALL  BE
 USED  TO  DETERMINE  ELIGIBILITY  FOR  ALL  BENEFITS ADMINISTERED BY THE
 OFFICE.
  2. SUCH UNIVERSAL BENEFITS FORM SHALL LIST ALL INFORMATION  AND  QUES-
 TIONS  ON  SUCH  FORM  IN A MANNER THAT WOULD PERMIT ELIGIBILITY FOR ALL
 PUBLIC ASSISTANCE BENEFITS ADMINISTERED BY THE OFFICE OF  TEMPORARY  AND
 DISABILITY  ASSISTANCE,  AS MAY BE APPROPRIATE, OR REQUIRED BY LAW, RULE
 OR REGULATION.
  3. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISION OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY, LOCAL  SOCIAL
 SERVICES  DISTRICTS  SHALL  PROVIDE ALL APPLICANTS FOR PUBLIC ASSISTANCE
 WITH THE UNIVERSAL BENEFITS FORM.
  4. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY,  SUBSE-
 QUENT TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION, THE OFFICE OF TEMPORARY AND
 DISABILITY ASSISTANCE SHALL REVIEW THE UNIVERSAL BENEFITS FORM, NOT LESS
 THAN  ONCE EVERY SIX MONTHS, AND SHALL ADD ANY ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO
 THE FORM AS MAY BE APPROPRIATE OR REQUIRED BY LAW, RULE OR REGULATION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition,  amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation  of  this act on its effective date are authorized to be made and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05545-01-3