# Allows for in-state suppliers to receive preference in certain situations when the state is awarding contracts

**Bill ID:** A5724
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Josh Jensen
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5724 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5724)

## Summary

Allows for in-state suppliers to receive preference in certain situations when the state is awarding contracts.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5724
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. JENSEN -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Governmental Operations
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  state  finance law, in relation to allowing for
  in-state suppliers to receive preference in  certain  situations  when
  the state is awarding contracts

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The state finance law is amended by adding  a  new  section
 149 to read as follows:
  ยง  149.  IN-STATE  SUPPLIER  PREFERENCE  FOR  STATE  CONTRACTS. 1. FOR
 PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE  THE  FOLLOWING
 MEANINGS:
  (A)  "STATE  AGENCY" SHALL HAVE THE SAME MEANING AS DEFINED IN SECTION
 ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY-NINE-E OF THIS CHAPTER.
  (B) "EXISTING IN-STATE SUPPLIER" SHALL MEAN AN  INDIVIDUAL  OR  ENTITY
 WHO  IS  RESIDENT  IN  THE  STATE  AND REGULARLY AND CONSISTENTLY DOES A
 MAJORITY OF THEIR BUSINESS WITHIN THE STATE WHO IS ABLE TO PROVIDE GOODS
 OR SERVICES THAT THE STATE IS LOOKING TO CONTRACT FOR.
  2. WHEN A STATE CONTRACT FOR THE PURCHASE OF GOODS OR SERVICES  IS  TO
 BE MADE AND AWARDED TO THE LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER, AN OTHERWISE QUAL-
 IFIED  BIDDER  WHO WILL FULFILL THE CONTRACT WHO IS AN EXISTING IN-STATE
 SUPPLIER OF SUCH GOODS OR SERVICES SHALL BE ALLOWED TO MATCH THE BID  OF
 THE LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER BEFORE ANY CONTRACT IS MADE AND AWARDED BY
 THE  STATE  OR  BY ANY STATE AGENCY IF SUCH LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER IS
 NOT AN EXISTING IN-STATE SUPPLIER, PROVIDED THAT THE  COST  INCLUDED  IN
 THE  BID  OF  SUCH  EXISTING  IN-STATE SUPPLIER IS NOT MORE THAN FIFTEEN
 PERCENT GREATER THAN THE COST INCLUDED IN THE BID OF THE LOWEST  RESPON-
 SIBLE BIDDER WHO IS NOT AN EXISTING IN-STATE SUPPLIER.
  3.  IF  AN  OTHERWISE  QUALIFIED  BIDDER  WHO  IS AN EXISTING IN-STATE
 SUPPLIER CHOOSES TO MATCH THE LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER WHO  IS  NOT  AN
 EXISTING  IN-STATE  SUPPLIER,  THEN THE STATE OR A STATE AGENCY MAY GIVE
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03934-01-3
 A. 5724  2
 
 PREFERENCE TO SUCH EXISTING IN-STATE SUPPLIER WHEN MAKING  AND  AWARDING
 SUCH CONTRACT.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.