# Provides that a fire company may elect to include call firefighters within its membership who shall receive a stipend for each call that he or she responds to

**Bill ID:** A5744
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Albert A. Stirpe
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5744 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5744)

## Summary

Provides that a fire company may elect to include call firefighters within its membership who shall receive a stipend for each call that he or she responds to.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5744
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. STIRPE -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Local Governments
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the general municipal law, in relation to call fire-
  fighters
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  The  general  municipal  law  is  amended by adding a new
 section 201-a to read as follows:
  ยง 201-A. CALL FIREFIGHTERS.  ANY VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY OF  A  COUNTY,
 CITY,  TOWN,  VILLAGE,  FIRE  DISTRICT,  FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT OR ANY
 OTHER ENTITY THAT OPERATES  A  VOLUNTEER  FIRE  COMPANY,  MAY  ELECT  TO
 INCLUDE WITHIN ITS MEMBERSHIP, CALL FIREFIGHTERS. SUCH CALL FIREFIGHTERS
 SHALL SERVE AT THE CALL OF THE FIRE COMPANY, AND SHALL RECEIVE A STIPEND
 EACH TIME SUCH CALL FIREFIGHTER RESPONDS TO A CALL BY SUCH FIRE COMPANY.
 THE  AMOUNT OF SUCH STIPEND SHALL BE DETERMINED BY THE FIRE COMPANY, BUT
 SHALL NOT EXCEED FIFTY DOLLARS PER CALL OR FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS ANNUAL-
 LY PER CALL FIREFIGHTER.  CALL FIREFIGHTERS SHALL MEET ALL CRITERIA  AND
 REQUIREMENTS  NECESSARY  TO  BE A VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER.  CANDIDATES FOR
 CALL FIREFIGHTERS SHALL APPLY TO THE FIRE COMPANY IN A MANNER  AND  FORM
 TO  BE  DETERMINED  BY SUCH FIRE COMPANY. CALL FIREFIGHTERS SHALL IN ALL
 RESPECTS BE AFFORDED THE STATUS AND BENEFITS OF  VOLUNTEER  FIREFIGHTERS
 AND  SHALL  BE  ELIGIBLE  TO  PARTICIPATE IN THE LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARD
 PROGRAM, PROVIDED HOWEVER THAT CALL FIREFIGHTERS SHALL NOT  BE  ENTITLED
 TO ANY PENSION OR RETIREMENT BENEFITS AFFORDED TO FULL-TIME PROFESSIONAL
 FIREFIGHTERS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07329-01-3