# Authorizes a parking permit system for park-and-rides in the borough of Staten Island in the city of New York

**Bill ID:** A5812
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Charles Fall
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5812 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5812)

## Summary

Authorizes a parking permit system for park-and-rides in the borough of Staten Island in the city of New York; requires residents of Staten Island to receive a permit free of charge and out-of-state residents to pay an annual fee for such permit.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5812
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. FALL -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic  law,  in  relation  to  parking
  permit systems for park-and-rides on Staten Island
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The vehicle and traffic law is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 1640-s to read as follows:
  ยง  1640-S. PARKING PERMIT SYSTEMS FOR PARK-AND-RIDES ON STATEN ISLAND.
 1.  NOTWITHSTANDING THE PROVISIONS OF ANY LAW TO THE CONTRARY, THE  CITY
 OF  NEW YORK MAY, BY ADOPTION OF A LOCAL LAW OR ORDINANCE, PROVIDE FOR A
 PARKING PERMIT SYSTEM FOR PARK-AND-RIDES AND FIX AND REQUIRE THE PAYMENT
 OF FEES APPLICABLE TO PARKING WITHIN THE  AREA  IN  WHICH  SUCH  PARKING
 SYSTEM IS IN EFFECT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.
  2. SUCH PARKING PERMIT SYSTEMS FOR PARK-AND-RIDES SHALL ONLY BE ESTAB-
 LISHED  WITHIN  THE  BOROUGH OF STATEN ISLAND FOR PARK-AND-RIDES LOCATED
 WITHIN SUCH BOROUGH.
  3. RESIDENTS OF STATEN ISLAND SHALL RECEIVE A PERMIT  FREE  OF  CHARGE
 AND OUT-OF-STATE RESIDENTS SHALL PAY AN ANNUAL FEE FOR SUCH PERMIT.
  4. THE LOCAL LAW OR ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR SUCH PERMIT SYSTEMS SHALL:
  (A)  SET  FORTH  THE  FACTORS  WHICH NECESSITATE THE ENACTMENT OF SUCH
 PERMIT SYSTEM;
  (B) PROVIDE THAT MOTOR VEHICLES REGISTERED PURSUANT  TO  SECTION  FOUR
 HUNDRED  FOUR-A OF THIS CHAPTER SHALL BE EXEMPT FROM ANY PERMIT REQUIRE-
 MENT;
  (C) PROVIDE THE TIMES OF THE DAY AND THE DAYS OF THE WEEK DURING WHICH
 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS SHALL BE IN EFFECT;
  (D) PROVIDE THE SCHEDULE OF FEES TO BE PAID FOR THE  PARKING  PERMITS;
 AND
  (E)  PROVIDE  THAT  SUCH FEES SHALL BE CREDITED TO THE GENERAL FUND OF
 THE CITY.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08517-01-3
 A. 5812  2
 
  5. NO LOCAL LAW OR ORDINANCE SHALL BE ADOPTED PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION
 UNTIL A PUBLIC HEARING THEREON HAS  BEEN  HAD  IN  THE  SAME  MANNER  AS
 REQUIRED  FOR  PUBLIC  HEARINGS ON A LOCAL LAW PURSUANT TO THE MUNICIPAL
 HOME RULE LAW.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.