# Designates a portion of the state highway system in the town of Lewisboro as the "John Jay High School Veterans Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** A5814A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Chris Burdick
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A5814A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5814A)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system in the town of Lewisboro as the "John Jay High School Veterans Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5814
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. BURDICK -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system in the town of Lewisboro  as  the  "John  Jay
  High School Veterans Memorial Highway"

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-o to
 read as follows:
  ยง 344-O. PORTION OF STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE "JOHN
 JAY HIGH SCHOOL VETERANS MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".  ALL  THAT  PORTION  OF  THE
 STATE  HIGHWAY  SYSTEM  CONSTITUTING  STATE ROUTE 121 BEGINNING WITH ITS
 INTERSECTION AT ROUTE 35 OLD POST ROAD AND ENDING WITH ITS  INTERSECTION
 AT  GIDEON REYNOLDS ROAD, SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS THE "JOHN JAY
 HIGH SCHOOL VETERANS MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".
  ยง 2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the  instal-
 lation  and  maintenance of adequate signing of the state highway system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this  act.  However,  to  avoid
 confusion  and  to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the desig-
 nation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall  be  one  of
 ceremonial  nature  and  the  official name of such highway shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. Such signing required pursuant to section two of this  act  shall
 at a minimum include the following language:
 "In  honor and in memory of the John Jay High School students who served
 and gave their lives for our country:
  Pfc. Kenneth Richard Jaconetti
  Lt. Cmdr. George Russell Matthews
  Pfc. Philip Grant Chipchase
  Lance Cpl. Howard J. Alaimo
  Cpl. James J. Jackowski
  Cpl. Bert D. Corcoran"
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05457-01-3