# Relates to residency requirement for the village clerk/treasurer and deputy village clerk/treasurer for the village of Otisville

**Bill ID:** A5869A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Karl Brabenec
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A5869A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5869A)

## Summary

Relates to residency requirements for the village clerk/treasurer and deputy village clerk/treasurer for the village of Otisville, Orange county.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5869
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. BRABENEC -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the public officers law and the village law, in relation
  to  residency  requirements for the village clerk/treasurer and deputy
  village clerk/treasurer for the village of Otisville

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 3 of the public officers law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 73 to read as follows:
  73.  IN  THE  VILLAGE  OF  OTISVILLE,  IN  THE  COUNTY  OF ORANGE, THE
 PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION REQUIRING A PERSON TO BE A  RESIDENT  OF  THE
 POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE FOR WHICH HE
 OR SHE SHALL BE CHOSEN OR WITHIN WHICH HIS OR HER OFFICIAL FUNCTIONS ARE
 REQUIRED  TO  BE  EXERCISED, SHALL NOT PREVENT A PERSON FROM HOLDING THE
 OFFICE OF VILLAGE CLERK/TREASURER AND DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK/TREASURER  OF
 THE  VILLAGE  OF OTISVILLE, PROVIDED THAT SUCH PERSON RESIDES WITHIN THE
 STATE OF NEW YORK. PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THE PERSON  PERFORMING  THE  FUNC-
 TIONS  OF  VILLAGE CLERK/TREASURER AND DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK/TREASURER IN
 ANY OTHER VILLAGE SHALL BE A RESIDENT OF SUCH VILLAGE, UNLESS  OTHERWISE
 PROVIDED BY AN ACT OF THE STATE LEGISLATURE.
  ยง  2.  Section  3-300  of  the  village law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 33 to read as follows:
  33. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER OR ANY OTHER GENER-
 AL LAW, LOCAL LAW, ORDINANCE, OR SPECIAL ACT, THE VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUS-
 TEES OF THE INCORPORATED VILLAGE OF OTISVILLE, ORANGE  COUNTY,  MAY,  BY
 RESOLUTION,  PROVIDE THAT THE VILLAGE CLERK/TREASURER AND DEPUTY VILLAGE
 CLERK/TREASURER OF THE VILLAGE OF OTISVILLE, ORANGE COUNTY, NEED NOT  BE
 RESIDENTS  OF  SUCH  VILLAGE,  BUT MUST BE RESIDENTS OF THE STATE OF NEW
 YORK.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09954-01-3