# Allows for the examination of industrial development agencies and not-for-profit corporations by county comptrollers

**Bill ID:** A5910
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kenneth Zebrowski
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [A5910 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5910)

## Summary

Allows for the examination of projects and/or actions by industrial development agencies and not-for-profit corporations by county comptrollers.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5910
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 24, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  ZEBROWSKI  --  read once and referred to the
  Committee on Local Governments
 
 AN ACT to amend the general municipal law, in relation to  allowing  for
  the  examination of industrial development agencies and not-for-profit
  corporations by county comptrollers

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  general  municipal  law  is  amended by adding a new
 section 34-b to read as follows:
  ยง 34-B. EXAMINATION OF INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT  AGENCIES  AND  NOT-FOR-
 PROFIT CORPORATIONS BY COUNTY COMPTROLLERS. 1. EXAMINATION OF INDUSTRIAL
 DEVELOPMENT  AGENCY  PROJECTS  AND ACTIONS BY COUNTY COMPTROLLERS. (A) A
 COUNTY COMPTROLLER MAY CONDUCT AN AUDIT OF A PROJECT AND/OR ACTION OF AN
 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY LOCATED WITHIN THE COUNTY.
  (B) IN COUNTIES WHERE  THERE  IS  NO  COUNTY  COMPTROLLER,  THE  CHIEF
 ELECTED  OFFICIAL  OF  THE COUNTY SHALL DESIGNATE THE BUDGET DIRECTOR OR
 FINANCE DIRECTOR TO UNDERTAKE SUCH AUDITS.
  (C) FOR PURPOSES OF  THIS  SECTION,  INDUSTRIAL  DEVELOPMENT  AGENCIES
 INCLUDE  SUCH PUBLIC AUTHORITIES DEFINED IN PARAGRAPH (C) OF SUBDIVISION
 TWO OF SECTION TWO OF THE PUBLIC AUTHORITIES LAW.
  2. EXAMINATION OF NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATIONS BY COUNTY  COMPTROLLERS.
 (A) A COUNTY COMPTROLLER MAY CONDUCT AN AUDIT OF A NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPO-
 RATION AFFILIATED WITH, SPONSORED BY, OR CREATED BY A COUNTY, CITY, TOWN
 OR VILLAGE GOVERNMENT, LOCATED WITHIN THE COUNTY.
  (B)  IN  COUNTIES  WHERE  THERE  IS  NO  COUNTY COMPTROLLER, THE CHIEF
 ELECTED OFFICIAL OF THE COUNTY SHALL DESIGNATE THE  BUDGET  DIRECTOR  OR
 FINANCE DIRECTOR TO UNDERTAKE SUCH AUDITS.
  (C)  FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATIONS INCLUDE
 SUCH PUBLIC AUTHORITIES DEFINED IN PARAGRAPH (B) OF SUBDIVISION  TWO  OF
 SECTION TWO OF THE PUBLIC AUTHORITIES LAW.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02353-01-3