# Requires information on resources for domestic violence and human trafficking victims to be posted in public restrooms

**Bill ID:** A5955
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michael J. Norris
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5955 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5955)

## Summary

Requires information on resources for domestic violence and human trafficking victims to be posted in public restrooms and other areas of public buildings which shall be deemed appropriate by the office and task force on human trafficking.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5955
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 24, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. NORRIS -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Governmental Operations
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  public  buildings law, in relation to requiring
  information on resources for domestic violence and  human  trafficking
  victims to be posted in public restrooms

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The public buildings law is amended by adding a new section
 147 to read as follows:
  ยง 147. DISPLAY OF RESOURCES FOR DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND HUMAN  TRAFFICK-
 ING VICTIMS. 1.  AS USED IN THIS SECTION:
  (A)  "COVERED PUBLIC BUILDING" SHALL HAVE THE SAME MEANING AS PROVIDED
 IN SECTION ONE HUNDRED FORTY-FOUR OF THIS ARTICLE;
  (B) "OFFICE" SHALL MEAN THE OFFICE  FOR  THE  PREVENTION  OF  DOMESTIC
 VIOLENCE; AND
  (C)  "TASK FORCE" SHALL MEAN THE NEW YORK STATE INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE
 ON HUMAN TRAFFICKING.
  2. THE OFFICE, IN COLLABORATION WITH THE TASK FORCE, SHALL CREATE  AND
 PUBLISH  A POSTER CONTAINING INFORMATION WHICH SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE
 LIMITED TO, CONTACT INFORMATION FOR THE NEW YORK STATE POLICE, THE DIVI-
 SION OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE SERVICES, AND THE  NATIONAL  HUMAN  TRAFFICKING
 HOTLINE,  THE  DOMESTIC  VIOLENCE HOTLINE TELEPHONE NUMBER MAINTAINED BY
 THE OFFICE, AND ANY OTHER INFORMATION THE OFFICE AND  TASK  FORCE  SHALL
 DEEM  APPROPRIATE TO ASSIST VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND HUMAN TRAF-
 FICKING. SUCH INFORMATION SHALL BE PRINTED IN ENGLISH AND IN  ANY  OTHER
 LANGUAGES DEEMED APPROPRIATE BY THE OFFICE AND TASK FORCE.
  3. A COVERED PUBLIC BUILDING SHALL DISPLAY THE POSTER CREATED PURSUANT
 TO  SUBDIVISION  TWO  OF THIS SECTION IN PLAIN VIEW AND IN A CONSPICUOUS
 PLACE AND MANNER IN  ALL  PUBLIC  RESTROOMS,  AND  IN  ANY  OTHER  AREAS
 DIRECTED BY THE OFFICE AND TASK FORCE.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08133-01-3