# Establishes mandatory minimum medicaid coverage for hospital confinement for childbirth

**Bill ID:** A5966
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Vivian Cook
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5966 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5966)

## Summary

Requires all insurance policies and health maintenance organization contracts to provide coverage for maternity patients and their newborns for hospital stays of at least 48 hours following childbirth by natural delivery and 96 hours following childbirth by caesarean section; provides such coverage for patients who are recipients of medicaid.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5966
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 24, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. COOK, BICHOTTE HERMELYN, DICKENS, HYNDMAN, GLICK,
  WOERNER,  DE LOS SANTOS  --  Multi-Sponsored  by  --  M. of A. COLTON,
  DINOWITZ -- read once and referred to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the social services law,  in  relation  to  establishing
  mandatory  minimum  medicaid  coverage  for  hospital  confinement for
  childbirth
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  365-a  of  the social services law is amended by
 adding a new subdivision 6-a to read as follows:
  6-A. (A) MEDICAL ASSISTANCE  SHALL  ALSO  INCLUDE  INPATIENT  HOSPITAL
 COVERAGE FOR MOTHER AND FOR NEWBORN FOR AT LEAST FORTY-EIGHT HOURS AFTER
 CHILDBIRTH  FOR  ANY DELIVERY OTHER THAN A CAESAREAN SECTION, AND FOR AT
 LEAST NINETY-SIX HOURS AFTER A CAESAREAN SECTION.
  (B) MATERNITY CARE COVERAGE SHALL ALSO INCLUDE, AT A  MINIMUM,  PARENT
 EDUCATION,  ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING IN BREAST OR BOTTLE FEEDING, AND THE
 PERFORMANCE OF ANY NECESSARY MATERNAL AND NEWBORN CLINICAL ASSESSMENTS.
  (C) A MOTHER SHALL HAVE THE OPTION TO BE DISCHARGED EARLIER  THAN  THE
 TIME  PERIODS  ESTABLISHED IN PARAGRAPH (A) OF THIS SUBDIVISION. IN SUCH
 CASE, THE INPATIENT HOSPITAL COVERAGE MUST INCLUDE  AT  LEAST  ONE  HOME
 CARE  VISIT,  WHICH SHALL BE IN ADDITION TO, RATHER THAN IN LIEU OF, ANY
 HOME HEALTH CARE COVERAGE OTHERWISE AVAILABLE.  THE  MEDICAL  ASSISTANCE
 PROGRAM  MUST  COVER  THE  HOME CARE VISIT WHICH MAY BE REQUESTED AT ANY
 TIME WITHIN FORTY-EIGHT HOURS OF THE TIME OF DELIVERY (NINETY-SIX  HOURS
 IN  THE CASE OF A CAESAREAN SECTION) AND SHALL BE DELIVERED WITHIN TWEN-
 TY-FOUR HOURS, (I) AFTER DISCHARGE, OR (II) OF THE TIME OF THE  MOTHER'S
 REQUEST, WHICHEVER IS LATER.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04785-01-3