# Relates to filing certain legal papers in civil court by electronic means

**Bill ID:** A5977
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** MaryJane Shimsky
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A5977 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A5977)

## Summary

Requires answers to pleadings, motions, and responses to be filed by electronic means; provides that discovery demand may not be e-filed.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5977
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 24, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. SHIMSKY -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the civil practice law and rules, in relation to  e-fil-
  ing
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The civil practice law and rules is amended by adding a new
 article 99 to read as follows:
 
  ARTICLE 99
  E-FILING
 
 SECTION 9900. DEFINITIONS.
  9901. E-FILING.
  9902. NOTICE OF E-FILING.
  ยง 9900. DEFINITIONS. FOR PURPOSES OF THIS  ARTICLE,  "E-FILING"  SHALL
 MEAN THE FILING OF LEGAL PAPERS BY ELECTRONIC MEANS.
  ยง  9901.  E-FILING. 1. ANSWERS TO PLEADINGS, MOTIONS, AND RESPONSES TO
 MOTIONS MUST BE E-FILED. ANY COUNSEL MAKING A PLEADING OR  MOTION  WHICH
 REQUIRES  OPPOSING COUNSEL TO E-FILE HIS OR HER ANSWER OR RESPONSE SHALL
 INCLUDE A BRIEF STATEMENT STATING THAT ANY PAPERS SUBMITTED IN  RESPONSE
 MUST  BE  FILED  WITH THE COURT THROUGH ELECTRONIC MEANS. SUCH STATEMENT
 SHALL ALSO INCLUDE THE PROPER EMAIL ADDRESS TO WHICH SUCH OPPOSING COUN-
 SEL SHALL SUBMIT HIS OR HER PAPERS. THE INCLUSION OF AN  IMPROPER  EMAIL
 ADDRESS  OR  FAILURE  TO  INCLUDE SUCH STATEMENT SHALL RENDER ANY PAPERS
 VOID.
  2. THE FOLLOWING PAPERS MAY NOT BE E-FILED:
  A. DISCOVERY DEMANDS;
  B. RESPONSES TO ANY DISCOVERY DEMANDS;
  3. E-FILING OF ANY PAPERS SPECIFIED IN SUBDIVISION TWO OF THIS SECTION
 SHALL NOT CONSTITUTE PROPER SERVICE OR FILING OF SUCH PAPERS.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09678-01-3
 A. 5977  2
 
  ยง 9902. NOTICE OF E-FILING. A NOTICE OF E-FILING SHALL BE SERVED  UPON
 OPPOSING  COUNSEL.  SUCH  NOTICE SHALL BE MADE BY MAILING SUCH NOTICE BY
 FIRST CLASS MAIL TO SUCH COUNSEL AT HIS OR HER ACTUAL PLACE OF BUSINESS,
 OR AT THE ADDRESS PROVIDED BY SUCH COUNSEL FOR THE PURPOSES OF RECEIVING
 DOCUMENTS.  AN AFFIDAVIT OF SERVICE SHALL BE FILED WITH THE CLERK OF THE
 COURT DESIGNATED IN THE NOTICE. SERVICE SHALL BE DEEMED COMPLETED TWENTY
 DAYS AFTER THE FILING OF SUCH AFFIDAVIT.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have  become  a law and shall apply to any papers filed on or after such
 effective date.