# Creates a program to assist municipalities with water quality improvement of water bodies within the municipality managed by lake associations

**Bill ID:** A6056AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Steven Otis
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A6056AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6056AA)

## Summary

Creates a program to assist municipalities with water quality improvement of water bodies within the municipality managed by lake associations.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6056--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 31, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. OTIS, COLTON, SLATER -- read once and referred to
  the  Committee  on Environmental Conservation -- committee discharged,
  bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended  and  recommitted  to  said
  committee
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  environmental  conservation law, in relation to
  creating a program to assist local municipalities with  water  quality
  improvement of water bodies managed by lake associations
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The environmental conservation law is amended by  adding  a
 new section 15-0519 to read as follows:
 ยง 15-0519. WATER QUALITY IMPROVEMENT; LAKE ASSOCIATIONS.
  1. SUBJECT TO AN APPROPRIATION FOR SUCH PURPOSE, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL,
 IN  CONSULTATION WITH THE ENVIRONMENTAL FACILITIES CORPORATION, CREATE A
 PROGRAM TO ASSIST MUNICIPALITIES TO IMPROVE THE WATER QUALITY  IN  WATER
 BODIES  MANAGED  BY  LAKE ASSOCIATIONS LOCATED WITHIN SUCH MUNICIPALITY.
 THE PROGRAM SHALL, IN COOPERATION WITH MUNICIPALITIES AT THE REQUEST  OF
 THE LAKE ASSOCIATION:
  A.  IDENTIFY  ANY  WATER QUALITY CONCERNS AT A WATER BODY MANAGED BY A
 LAKE ASSOCIATION WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY;
  B. DETERMINE THE MOST EFFECTIVE WAY TO  REMEDIATE  ANY  WATER  QUALITY
 CONCERNS; AND
  C.  ASSIST  WITH  DETERMINING  BEST  PRACTICES TO IMPROVE AND MAINTAIN
 WATER QUALITY OF WATER BODIES MANAGED BY LAKE  ASSOCIATIONS  WITHIN  THE
 MUNICIPALITY.
  2.  THE  DEPARTMENT  SHALL ESTABLISH A GRANT PROGRAM TO ASSIST MUNICI-
 PALITIES WITH REMEDIAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE  WATER  QUALITY  OF  WATER
 BODIES WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY MANAGED BY LAKE ASSOCIATIONS.
  3. THE DEPARTMENT IS AUTHORIZED TO PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS TO
 IMPLEMENT THIS SECTION.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06994-04-3
 A. 6056--A  2
 
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment, and/or repeal of any rules and regulations necessary to  implement
 the  provisions  of  this act on its effective date are authorized to be
 made and completed on or before such effective date.