# Requires audits of charter schools include comparing funding to the number of students to ensure proper funding

**Bill ID:** A6158
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Alicia Hyndman
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A6158 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6158)

## Summary

Requires audits of charter schools include comparing funding to the number of students to ensure proper funding.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6158
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. HYNDMAN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to  requiring  audits  of
  charter schools include comparing funding to the number of students to
  ensure proper funding
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Paragraph (c) of subdivision  1  of  section  2854  of  the
 education law, as amended by section 10-b of part A of chapter 56 of the
 laws of 2014, is amended to read as follows:
  (c)  A  charter  school  shall be subject to the financial audits, the
 audit procedures, and the audit requirements set forth in  the  charter,
 and  shall  be  subject  to audits of the comptroller of the city school
 district of the city of New York for charter schools located in New York
 city, and to the audits of the comptroller of the state of New York  for
 charter  schools  located  in  the  rest  of  the  state,  at his or her
 discretion, with respect to  the  school's  financial  operations.  Such
 procedures  and  standards  shall  be consistent with generally accepted
 accounting and audit  standards.  Independent  fiscal  audits  shall  be
 required at least once annually. TO ENSURE PROPER FUNDING OF THE CHARTER
 SCHOOL  AND AFFECTED PUBLIC SCHOOLS, ANY AUDIT OF A CHARTER SCHOOL UNDER
 THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, A COMPARISON OF THE
 FUNDING PROVIDED TO THE CHARTER  SCHOOL  PER  ENROLLED  STUDENT  TO  THE
 NUMBER OF CURRENTLY ENROLLED STUDENTS.
  ยง  2.  This act shall take effect on the first of July next succeeding
 the date on which it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the
 addition, amendment and/or repeal of any rule  or  regulation  necessary
 for  the implementation of this act on its effective date are authorized
 to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10192-01-3