# Removes references to the terms "masseur" and "masseuse"

**Bill ID:** A6166
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Monique Chandler-Waterman
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A6166 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6166)

## Summary

Removes references to the terms "masseur" and "masseuse".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6166
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. CHANDLER-WATERMAN -- read once and referred to
  the Committee on Higher Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to removing references to
  "masseur" and "masseuse"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Section  7802 of the education law, as amended by chapter
 230 of the laws of 1997, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 7802. Practice of massage  therapy  and  use  of  title  ["masseur",
 "masseuse"  or]  "massage  therapist"  or the term "massage" or "massage
 therapy". Only a person licensed or authorized pursuant to this  chapter
 shall  practice  massage  therapy  and only a person licensed under this
 article shall use the title ["masseur", "masseuse" or]  "massage  thera-
 pist".  No  person,  firm,  partnership  or  corporation  claiming to be
 engaged in the practice of massage  or  massage  therapy  shall  in  any
 manner  describe,  advertise, or place any advertisement for services as
 defined in section seventy-eight hundred one of this article unless such
 services are performed by a person licensed or  authorized  pursuant  to
 this chapter.
  ยง  2.  The opening paragraph of section 7804 of the education law, as
 amended by chapter 230 of the laws of 1997,  is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  To  qualify  for  a  license  as  a  massage  therapist,  [masseur  or
 masseuse,] an applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
  ยง 3.  Subdivision 1 of section 7806 of the education law,  as  amended
 by chapter 230 of the laws of 1997,  is amended to read as follows:
  1. The department may issue a limited permit to practice massage ther-
 apy  as  a licensed massage therapist[, masseur or masseuse] to a person
 who has not previously held such a permit and who  fulfills  all  except
 the  examination  and  citizenship  requirements for a license, provided
 however that a permit shall not be issued to a person who has failed the
 state licensing examination.
  ยง 4.  This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09687-01-3