# Prohibits state officers and employees from using state aircraft for political purposes

**Bill ID:** A6178
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** David DiPietro
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A6178 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6178)

## Summary

Prohibits a statewide elected official, state officer or employee, member of the legislature or legislative employee to use state aircraft for political purposes; provides a violation of such restriction constitutes a class A misdemeanor.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6178
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. DiPIETRO -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the public officers law, in relation to political use of
  state aircraft by certain state officers and employees
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 18 of section 73 of the public officers law, as
 amended by section 5 of part CC of chapter 56 of the laws  of  2015,  is
 renumbered  subdivision 19 and amended and a new subdivision 18 is added
 to read as follows:
  18. NO STATEWIDE ELECTED OFFICIAL, STATE OFFICER OR  EMPLOYEE,  MEMBER
 OF  THE LEGISLATURE OR LEGISLATIVE EMPLOYEE MAY USE OR DIRECT THE USE OF
 STATE AIRCRAFT FOR POLITICAL PURPOSES.
  19. In addition to any penalty contained in  any  other  provision  of
 law,  any person who knowingly and intentionally violates the provisions
 of subdivisions two through five, seven, seven-a, eight, twelve or four-
 teen through [seventeen] EIGHTEEN of this section shall be subject to  a
 civil  penalty in an amount not to exceed forty thousand dollars and the
 value of any gift, compensation [or], benefit [received] OR USE OF STATE
 AIRCRAFT in connection with such violation. Assessment of a civil penal-
 ty hereunder shall be made by the state oversight body with jurisdiction
 over such person.  A state oversight body acting pursuant to its  juris-
 diction, may, in lieu of a civil penalty, with respect to a violation of
 subdivisions  two  through  five,  seven [or], eight OR EIGHTEEN of this
 section, refer a violation of any such subdivision  to  the  appropriate
 prosecutor  and  upon such conviction such violation shall be punishable
 as a class A misdemeanor.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07569-01-3