# Requires residential property owners to register backyard chicken coops

**Bill ID:** A6187
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Keith Brown
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A6187 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6187)

## Summary

Requires residential property owners to register backyard chicken coops for the purposes of containing disease outbreaks affecting such chicken coops.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6187
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. K. BROWN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Agriculture
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the agriculture and markets law, in relation to regis-
  tration of backyard chicken coops
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1. The agriculture and markets law is amended by adding a new
 section 385 to read as follows:
  ยง 385. BACKYARD CHICKEN COOP REGISTRATION. 1. ANY PERSON  WHO  OWNS  A
 CHICKEN  COOP  ON THEIR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY SHALL REGISTER SUCH CHICKEN
 COOP WITH THE MUNICIPALITY IN WHICH THEIR PROPERTY IS LOCATED ON A  FORM
 TO  BE  PRESCRIBED  BY  THE  COMMISSIONER.  SUCH  REGISTRATION  SHALL BE
 CONDUCTED WITHIN THIRTY DAYS OF ESTABLISHING SUCH CHICKEN COOP.
  2. MUNICIPALITIES SHALL REGULARLY SEND AN UPDATED LIST OF  ALL  REGIS-
 TERED  RESIDENTIAL  CHICKEN  COOPS  TO THE NEW YORK FARM BUREAU. THE NEW
 YORK FARM BUREAU SHALL CREATE AND MAINTAIN AN  ONLINE  DATABASE  OF  ALL
 REGISTERED  RESIDENTIAL CHICKEN COOPS IN THE STATE AND SHALL CONTACT ALL
 RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY OWNERS LISTED IN SUCH DATABASE UPON THE  DOCUMENTED
 OUTBREAK OF DISEASE AFFECTING RESIDENTIAL CHICKEN COOPS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09941-01-3