# Relates to appointments to the water board of the city of New York

**Bill ID:** A6254
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** David Weprin
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A6254 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6254)

## Summary

Relates to appointments to the water board of the city of New York.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6254
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. WEPRIN -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Corporations, Authorities and Commissions
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the public authorities law, in relation to the city of
  New York water board
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Subdivision 2 of section 1045-f of the public authorities
 law, as added by chapter 513 of the laws of 1984, is amended to read  as
 follows:
  2.  (A)  The  water board shall consist of [seven] EIGHT members TO BE
 appointed [by the mayor.] AS FOLLOWS:
  (I) FOUR MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE MAYOR;
  (II) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE SPEAKER OF THE CITY COUNCIL;
  (III) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK;
  (IV) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE PUBLIC ADVOCATE; AND
  (V) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL, WHO SHALL BE A  RESIDENT
 OF THE WATER SHED AREA.
  (B)  ALL  MEMBERS APPOINTED TO THE BOARD MUST BE CONFIRMED BY THE CITY
 COUNCIL BEFORE THEY MAY COMMENCE THEIR TERM.
  (C) Terms of office of the members shall be two years except that  the
 terms of four of the board members first appointed shall be one year. At
 least  one member shall have experience in the science of water resource
 development. No member shall be a director of the authority.  [The mayor
 shall appoint a chairman from  among  the  members  of  the  board.]  NO
 APPOINTEE SHALL BE AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE OF THE CITY, OR HAVE SERVED IN
 SUCH  CAPACITY  IN  THE  PRECEDING SIX MONTH PERIOD.  THE CHAIR SHALL BE
 DULY ELECTED BY THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD, SUBJECT TO THE SAME QUORUM AND
 VOTING REQUIREMENTS  AS  PROVIDED  FOR  IN  SUBDIVISION  SEVEN  OF  THIS
 SECTION.  All  members shall continue to hold office until their succes-
 sors are appointed and qualified.  Vacancies  shall  be  filled  in  the
 manner  provided  for original appointments. Vacancies, occurring other-
 wise than by expiration of term of office, shall be filled in  the  same
 manner as original appointments for the unexpired terms.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09894-01-3