# Designates a portion of the highway system the "Fort Hamilton Veterans Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** A6287DD
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Alec Brook-Krasny
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A6287DD PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6287DD)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the highway system in Kings county as the "Fort Hamilton Veterans Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6287--D
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. BROOK-KRASNY, TANNOUSIS, CHANG -- read once and
  referred to the Committee on Transportation --  committee  discharged,
  bill  amended,  ordered  reprinted  as amended and recommitted to said
  committee -- committee discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted  as
  amended  and recommitted to said committee -- again reported from said
  committee with amendments, ordered reprinted as amended and  recommit-
  ted  to  said committee -- recommitted to the Committee on Transporta-
  tion  in  accordance  with  Assembly  Rule  3,  sec.  2  --  committee
  discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted
  to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the  state highway system in Kings county as the "Fort Hamilton Veter-
  ans Memorial Highway"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-p to
 read as follows:
  ยง  344-P.  PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "FORT HAMILTON VETERANS MEMORIAL HIGHWAY". ALL THAT PORTION OF THE STATE
 HIGHWAY SYSTEM CONSTITUTING INTERSTATE ROUTE 278 IN THE COUNTY OF KINGS,
 BEGINNING AT THE VERRAZANO-NARROWS BRIDGE,  CONTINUING  IN  A  GENERALLY
 NORTHERLY  DIRECTION,  AND TERMINATING WHERE SUCH ROUTE CROSSES OVER 6TH
 AVENUE, SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS  THE  "FORT  HAMILTON  VETERANS
 MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".
  ยง  2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the instal-
 lation and maintenance of adequate signing of the state  highway  system
 as  designated  pursuant  to section one of this act.  However, to avoid
 confusion and to limit any possible disruption of commerce,  the  desig-
 nation  called  for  pursuant to section one of this act shall be one of
 ceremonial nature and the official name of such  highway  shall  not  be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10288-05-4