# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Private Sidney A. Scofield Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** A6284AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Anil Beephan Jr.
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A6284AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6284AA)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system in the town of Fishkill, Dutchess county as the "Private Sidney A. Scofield Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6284--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. BEEPHAN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Transportation -- committee discharged, bill  amended,  ordered
  reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the  state  highway system as the "Private Sidney A. Scofield Memorial
  Highway"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 345-b to
 read as follows:
  ยง  345-B.  PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "PRIVATE SIDNEY A. SCOFIELD MEMORIAL HIGHWAY". ALL THAT PORTION OF STATE
 ROUTE NINE-D IN THE TOWN OF  FISHKILL,  COUNTY  OF  DUTCHESS,  SHALL  BE
 DESIGNATED  AND  KNOWN AS THE "PRIVATE SIDNEY A. SCOFIELD MEMORIAL HIGH-
 WAY".
  ยง 2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the  instal-
 lation  and  maintenance of adequate signing of the state highway system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this  act.  However,  to  avoid
 confusion  and  to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the desig-
 nation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall  be  one  of
 ceremonial  nature  and  the  official name of such highway shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08952-02-3