# Enacts the "omnibus learning for work act"; appropriation

**Bill ID:** A6303
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michael J. Norris
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A6303 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6303)

## Summary

Enacts the "omnibus learning for work act"; establishes the youth apprenticeship program (Part A); establishes the enhanced regents professional diploma (Part B); establishes a youth apprenticeship tax credit (Part C); establishes the community college merit and mobility scholarship (Part D); renames certain schools established by a board of cooperative educational services as career prep centers (Part E); relates to the salary of certain teachers and staff providing instruction in career and technical education (Part F); and implements the learning for work program (Part G).

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6303
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. NORRIS -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Education
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the labor law, in relation to establishing the youth
  apprenticeship program; and making an appropriation therefor (Part A);
  to amend the education law, in relation to establishing  the  enhanced
  regents  professional  diploma  (Part  B);  to  amend  the tax law, in
  relation to establishing a youth apprenticeship tax credit  (Part  C);
  to  amend the education law, in relation to establishing the community
  college merit and mobility scholarship (Part D); to amend  the  educa-
  tion  law,  in  relation  to renaming certain schools established by a
  board of cooperative educational services as career prep centers;  and
  making an appropriation therefor (Part E); to amend the education law,
  in  relation  to  the  salary  of certain teachers and staff providing
  instruction in career and technical education (Part F); and  to  amend
  the  education  law, in relation to implementing the learning for work
  program (Part G)
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  This  act shall be known and may be cited as the "omnibus
 learning for work act".
  § 2. Legislative findings and  intent.  According  to  the  National
 Skills  Coalition,  middle-skill jobs make up the largest portion of New
 York's labor market. While 49% of all jobs available throughout New York
 in 2018 were middle-skill, only 37% of the state's workers were  trained
 for the positions. This lack of preparedness has driven many high school
 graduates into low-paying jobs, or college degree programs that they are
 not interested in, which fail to lead to careers and result in an unrea-
 sonably  high  amount  of student debt. For many current and future high
 school students, the traditional pathway of a basic high  school  educa-
 tion  and then on to a four-year college may not be the correct route to
 take. These students would benefit from a  program  that  would  prepare
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10209-01-3
 A. 6303  2
 
 them  for employment immediately upon graduating high school. Therefore,
 the legislature finds it necessary to establish this "learning for work"
 program in our high schools that  will  create  a  youth  apprenticeship
 program,  an enhanced regents professional diploma with a designation in
 a specified occupational area, a tax credit for employers who take  part
 in  the  youth  apprenticeship  program,  a  community college merit and
 mobility scholarship, rebrand all educational programs provided or oper-
 ated by a board of cooperative educational services which shall be known
 as "career prep centers", increase the salaries paid to any  career  and
 technical  education teachers, supervisors or other employees of a board
 of cooperative educational services,  and  require  the  departments  of
 education,  in  collaboration with the department of labor, to implement
 the learning for work program, by the 2025--2026 school year.  This  act
 would  further  the  goals of limiting the accumulation of unsustainable
 student debt and ensuring all students in the  state  of  New  York  are
 prepared to enter the twenty-first century workforce.
  §  3.  This  act enacts into law major components of legislation which
 are necessary to implement the "omnibus learning for work  act".  Each
 component  is  wholly  contained  within  a  Part  identified as Parts A
 through G. The effective date for each  particular  provision  contained
 within  such  Part  is  set  forth in the last section of such Part. Any
 provision in any section contained within a Part, including  the  effec-
 tive  date  of  the  Part, which makes a reference to a section "of this
 act", when used in connection with that particular component,  shall  be
 deemed  to  mean  and  refer to the corresponding section of the Part in
 which it is found.  Section five of this act  sets  forth  the  general
 effective date of this act.
 
  PART A
 
  Section  1.  The  labor law is amended by adding a new article 23-C to
 read as follows:
  ARTICLE 23-C
  YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM
 SECTION 832. DEFINITIONS.
  832-A. YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.
  832-B. LOCAL PARTNERSHIP DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
  832-C. YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM OUTCOME REQUIREMENTS.
  832-D. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
  § 832. DEFINITIONS. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS  ARTICLE,  THE  FOLLOWING
 TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  1.  "LOCAL  PARTNERSHIP"  MEANS  ANY COMBINATION OF ONE OR MORE SCHOOL
 DISTRICTS, OTHER PUBLIC  AGENCIES,  COMMUNITY  COLLEGES,  NOT-FOR-PROFIT
 ORGANIZATIONS, INDIVIDUALS, BUSINESSES OR OTHER PERSONS, WHO HAVE AGREED
 TO  BE  RESPONSIBLE  FOR  IMPLEMENTING  AND  COORDINATING  A LOCAL YOUTH
 APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM AND HAVE RECEIVED  FORMAL  RECOGNITION  FROM  THE
 DEPARTMENT.
  2.  "PUBLIC  AGENCY"  MEANS  A  COUNTY,  CITY, VILLAGE, TOWN OR SCHOOL
 DISTRICT OR AN AGENCY OF THIS STATE OR OF A COUNTY, CITY, VILLAGE,  TOWN
 OR SCHOOL DISTRICT.
  §  832-A. YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM. 1. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTAB-
 LISH A YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM. THE  YOUTH  APPRENTICESHIP  PROGRAM
 SHALL  BE  A ONE OR TWO YEAR PROGRAM BEGINNING IN GRADE ELEVEN OR TWELVE
 AND COMBINE  ACADEMIC  CLASSROOM  COURSEWORK  WITH  MENTORED  ON-THE-JOB
 TRAINING  IN  A  SPECIFIED  OCCUPATIONAL AREA. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR
 EACH YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM SHALL BE DETERMINED BY THE  RESPECTIVE
 A. 6303  3
 
 LOCAL  PARTNERSHIP RESPONSIBLE FOR IMPLEMENTING AND COORDINATING A LOCAL
 YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.
  2.  THE STATE APPRENTICESHIP AND TRAINING COUNCIL, THE STATE WORKFORCE
 INVESTMENT BOARD, THE BOARD OF REGENTS, AND THE STATE EDUCATION  DEPART-
 MENT  SHALL  ASSIST THE DEPARTMENT IN PROVIDING THE YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP
 PROGRAM UNDER SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION.
  3. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL APPROVE OCCUPATIONS AND  MAINTAIN  A  LIST  OF
 APPROVED OCCUPATIONS FOR THE YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.
  4.  THE  YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM CREATED UNDER SUBDIVISION ONE OF
 THIS SECTION  SHALL  NOT  AFFECT  ANY  APPRENTICESHIP  PROGRAM  THAT  IS
 GOVERNED  BY ARTICLE TWENTY-THREE OF THIS CHAPTER EXCEPT THAT AN APPREN-
 TICESHIP PROGRAM THAT IS GOVERNED BY ARTICLE TWENTY-THREE OF THIS  CHAP-
 TER  MAY GRANT CREDIT TOWARD THE COMPLETION OF AN APPRENTICESHIP FOR THE
 SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF A YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP UNDER SUBDIVISION ONE OF
 THIS SECTION.
  § 832-B. LOCAL PARTNERSHIP DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 1. FROM  FUND-
 ING  UNDER  THE  WORKFORCE  INVESTMENT  ACT, PUBLIC LAW 105-220, AND THE
 WORKFORCE INNOVATION  AND  OPPORTUNITY  ACT,  PUBLIC  LAW  113-128,  THE
 DEPARTMENT  MAY  AWARD  GRANTS  TO  APPLYING  LOCAL PARTNERSHIPS FOR THE
 IMPLEMENTATION AND COORDINATION OF LOCAL YOUTH  APPRENTICESHIP  PROGRAMS
 THAT  ARE  APPROVED  BY  THE  COMMISSIONER.  A LOCAL PARTNERSHIP THAT IS
 AWARDED A GRANT UNDER THIS SUBDIVISION MAY USE THE GRANT MONEYS  AWARDED
 FOR ANY OF THE FOLLOWING IMPLEMENTATION AND COORDINATION ACTIVITIES:
  (A)  RECRUITING  EMPLOYERS  TO  PROVIDE ON-THE-JOB TRAINING AND SUPER-
 VISION FOR YOUTH APPRENTICES AND PROVIDING TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO THOSE
 EMPLOYERS.
  (B) RECRUITING STUDENTS TO PARTICIPATE IN THE LOCAL YOUTH  APPRENTICE-
 SHIP  PROGRAM  AND  MONITORING THE PROGRESS OF YOUTH APPRENTICES PARTIC-
 IPATING IN THE PROGRAM.
  (C)  COORDINATING  YOUTH  APPRENTICESHIP  TRAINING  ACTIVITIES  WITHIN
 PARTICIPATING SCHOOL DISTRICTS AND AMONG PARTICIPATING SCHOOL DISTRICTS,
 POSTSECONDARY INSTITUTIONS AND EMPLOYERS.
  (D)  COORDINATING  ACADEMIC,  VOCATIONAL  AND  OCCUPATIONAL  LEARNING,
 SCHOOL-BASED AND WORK-BASED LEARNING  AND  SECONDARY  AND  POSTSECONDARY
 EDUCATION FOR PARTICIPANTS IN THE LOCAL YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.
  (E)  ASSISTING EMPLOYERS IN IDENTIFYING AND TRAINING WORKPLACE MENTORS
 AND MATCHING YOUTH APPRENTICES AND MENTORS.
  (F) ANY OTHER IMPLEMENTATION OR COORDINATION ACTIVITY THAT THE DEPART-
 MENT MAY DIRECT OR PERMIT THE LOCAL PARTNERSHIP TO PERFORM.
  2. A LOCAL PARTNERSHIP THAT IS AWARDED A GRANT UNDER  SUBDIVISION  ONE
 OF THIS SECTION SHALL NOT USE ANY OF THE GRANT MONEYS AWARDED TO PROVIDE
 FUNDING  TO  A  BUSINESS  THAT  IS OPERATED FOR PROFIT OR TO A NONPROFIT
 ORGANIZATION THAT REPRESENTS BUSINESS INTERESTS, AND SHALL ONLY BE  USED
 FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION.
  3. THE AMOUNT OF A GRANT AWARDED UNDER SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION
 SHALL  NOT  EXCEED  ONE  THOUSAND  DOLLARS PER YOUTH APPRENTICE. A LOCAL
 PARTNERSHIP THAT IS AWARDED  A  GRANT  UNDER  SUBDIVISION  ONE  OF  THIS
 SECTION  SHALL  PROVIDE  MATCHING FUNDS EQUAL TO AT LEAST TEN PERCENT OF
 THE GRANT AMOUNT AWARDED.
  § 832-C. YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM OUTCOME REQUIREMENTS.  1.  THE
 FOLLOWING  OUTCOMES ARE EXPECTED OF A LOCAL YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM
 THAT IS FUNDED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION  ONE  OF  SECTION  EIGHT  HUNDRED
 THIRTY-TWO-B OF THIS ARTICLE:
  (A)  AT  LEAST EIGHTY PERCENT OF THE YOUTH APPRENTICES WHO PARTICIPATE
 IN THE PROGRAM SHALL RECEIVE AN ENHANCED  REGENTS  PROFESSIONAL  DIPLOMA
 A. 6303  4
 
 PURSUANT  TO  SECTION  TWO  HUNDRED  EIGHT-B  OF  THE  EDUCATION  LAW ON
 COMPLETION OF THE YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP.
  (B) AT LEAST FIFTY PERCENT OF THE YOUTH APPRENTICES WHO PARTICIPATE IN
 THE  PROGRAM  SHALL  BE OFFERED EMPLOYMENT BY THE EMPLOYER THAT PROVIDED
 THE ON-THE-JOB TRAINING FOR THE YOUTH APPRENTICE ON  COMPLETION  OF  THE
 YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP.
  2.  ANY  STUDENT  TAKING  PART  IN  A YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM WHO
 RECEIVES AN ENHANCED REGENTS PROFESSIONAL DIPLOMA  PURSUANT  TO  SECTION
 TWO  HUNDRED  EIGHT-B OF THE EDUCATION LAW AND IS EITHER NOT OFFERED, OR
 CHOOSES NOT TO SEEK, EMPLOYMENT IN THEIR  SPECIFIED  OCCUPATIONAL  AREA,
 SHALL RECEIVE A MINIMUM OF FIFTEEN CREDIT HOURS TO BE APPLIED IN PURSUIT
 OF  A  POSTSECONDARY  DEGREE  AT  A STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK OR CITY
 UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK INSTITUTION.
  § 832-D. RULES AND REGULATIONS. THE DEPARTMENT  SHALL  PROMULGATE  ALL
 RULES AND REGULATIONS AS SHALL BE NECESSARY TO ADMINISTER THIS ARTICLE.
  §  2.  The  sum  of up to five million dollars ($5,000,000), is hereby
 appropriated to the department of labor for the purpose of carrying  out
 the  provisions  of  this act to be funded by grants under the workforce
 investment act, Public Law 105-220, and  the  workforce  innovation  and
 opportunity act, Public Law 113-128. Such moneys shall be payable on the
 audit  and  warrant of the comptroller on vouchers certified or approved
 by the commissioner of the department of labor in the manner  prescribed
 by law.
  § 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  PART B

  Section  1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 208-b
 to read as follows:
  § 208-B. ENHANCED REGENTS PROFESSIONAL  DIPLOMA.  1.  THE  BOARD  OF
 REGENTS  SHALL  CREATE  AN  ENHANCED  REGENTS  PROFESSIONAL  DIPLOMA  TO
 ACKNOWLEDGE THE PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND SPECIFIC  OCCUPATIONAL  TRAINING
 STUDENTS  OBTAIN  IN THE COURSE OF THEIR STUDY. SUCH DEGREE WILL INCLUDE
 DESIGNATIONS AS DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER THAT DENOTE  THE  PROFES-
 SIONAL  SKILLS AND SPECIFIC OCCUPATIONAL TRAINING OBTAINED BY A STUDENT.
 THE COMMISSIONER SHALL PROMULGATE REGULATIONS REGARDING THE REQUIREMENTS
 FOR AN ENHANCED REGENTS PROFESSIONAL DEGREE TO INCLUDE:
  A. COMPLETION OF A TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT;
  B. COMPLETION OF A WORK-SKILLS EMPLOYABILITY PROFILE;
  C. COMPLETION OF A WORK-BASED LEARNING EXPERIENCE; AND
  D. MEETING ALL REQUIREMENTS NECESSARY TO RECEIVE A  REGENTS DIPLOMA.
  2. THE COMMISSIONER, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE STATE APPRENTICESHIP  AND
 TRAINING  COUNCIL, THE STATE WORKFORCE INVESTMENT BOARD, AND THE DEPART-
 MENT OF LABOR SHALL ESTABLISH PROFESSIONAL SKILL AND OCCUPATIONAL TRAIN-
 ING DESIGNATIONS THAT MAY BE ATTACHED TO  AN  ENHANCED  REGENTS  PROFES-
 SIONAL  DIPLOMA  THAT SHALL DENOTE THE PROFESSIONAL SKILLS A STUDENT HAS
 OBTAINED THROUGHOUT THE COURSE OF HIS OR HER STUDIES.
  3. THE COMMISSIONER, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE STATE APPRENTICESHIP  AND
 TRAINING COUNCIL, THE STATE WORKFORCE INVESTMENT BOARD, AND THE  DEPART-
 MENT OF LABOR SHALL DESIGN A SERIES OF TECHNICAL ASSESSMENTS TO TEST THE
 SKILLS AND KNOWLEDGE STUDENTS HAVE OBTAINED IN THEIR WORK-BASED LEARNING
 EXPERIENCE.  THE  COMMISSIONER SHALL BE AUTHORIZED TO INCLUDE ANY PERSON
 OR ENTITY THAT IS PART OF A LOCAL PARTNERSHIP OF THE  YOUTH  APPRENTICE-
 SHIP  PROGRAM,  AS  DEFINED  IN  SECTION EIGHT HUNDRED THIRTY-TWO OF THE
 LABOR LAW, IN ANY AND ALL EFFORTS TO DESIGN TECHNICAL ASSESSMENTS.
 A. 6303  5
 
  4. THE COMMISSIONER, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE STATE APPRENTICESHIP  AND
 TRAINING  COUNCIL, THE STATE WORKFORCE INVESTMENT BOARD, AND THE DEPART-
 MENT OF LABOR SHALL CREATE A WORK-SKILL EMPLOYABILITY PROFILE FOR USE BY
 EMPLOYERS AND/OR EDUCATORS TO DOCUMENT A STUDENT'S  PROFESSIONAL  SKILLS
 AND SPECIFIC OCCUPATIONAL TRAINING.
  5.  THE  BOARD  OF  REGENTS  SHALL  PROMULGATE SUCH REGULATIONS OF THE
 COMMISSIONER AS MAY  BE  NECESSARY  TO  ESTABLISH  AN  ENHANCED  REGENTS
 PROFESSIONAL  DIPLOMA,  IMPLEMENT THE REQUIREMENTS HEREIN, AND ESTABLISH
 STANDARDS FOR WORK-BASED LEARNING EXPERIENCES INCLUDING REQUIREMENTS FOR
 VERIFICATION AND ELIGIBILITY.
  6.  THE  YOUTH  APPRENTICESHIP  PROGRAM  AS  DEFINED  IN  ARTICLE
 TWENTY-THREE-C  OF  THE  LABOR LAW SHALL BE CONSIDERED AN ELIGIBLE WORK-
 BASED LEARNING EXPERIENCE.
  7. STUDENTS FIRST ENTERING NINTH GRADE IN  THE  TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY-
 THREE--TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY-FOUR  SCHOOL  YEAR  AND THEREAFTER SHALL BE
 ELIGIBLE TO EARN AN ENHANCED REGENTS PROFESSIONAL DIPLOMA.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  PART C
 
  Section 1. Section 210-B of the tax law is amended  by  adding  a  new
 subdivision 59 to read as follows:
  59.  YOUTH  APPRENTICESHIP  TAX  CREDIT.  (A)  ALLOWANCE  OF CREDIT. A
 TAXPAYER SHALL BE ALLOWED A CREDIT AGAINST THE TAX IMPOSED BY THIS ARTI-
 CLE PROVIDED THAT SUCH TAXPAYER TAKES PART IN THE  YOUTH  APPRENTICESHIP
 PROGRAM, PURSUANT TO ARTICLE TWENTY-THREE-C OF THE LABOR LAW.
  (B)  AMOUNT  OF CREDIT. THE AMOUNT OF THE CREDIT SHALL BE EQUAL TO ONE
 THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS  FOR  EACH  APPRENTICE  THE  PARTICIPATING
 EMPLOYER SPONSORS.
  (C)  APPLICATION  OF CREDIT. THE CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS SUBDIVISION
 FOR ANY TAXABLE YEAR SHALL NOT REDUCE THE TAX DUE FOR THAT YEAR TO  LESS
 THAN  THE  HIGHER OF THE AMOUNTS PRESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (D) OF SUBDIVI-
 SION ONE OF SECTION TWO HUNDRED TEN OF THIS ARTICLE.
  § 2. Section 606 of the tax law is amended by adding a new  subsection
 (ooo) to read as follows:
  (OOO)  YOUTH  APPRENTICESHIP  TAX  CREDIT. (1) ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT.  A
 TAXPAYER SHALL BE ALLOWED A CREDIT AGAINST THE TAX IMPOSED BY THIS ARTI-
 CLE PROVIDED THAT SUCH TAXPAYER TAKES PART IN THE  YOUTH  APPRENTICESHIP
 PROGRAM, PURSUANT TO ARTICLE TWENTY-THREE-C OF THE LABOR LAW.
  (2)  AMOUNT  OF CREDIT. THE AMOUNT OF THE CREDIT SHALL BE EQUAL TO ONE
 THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS  FOR  EACH  APPRENTICE  THE  PARTICIPATING
 EMPLOYER SPONSORS.
  (3)  APPLICATION OF CREDIT. IF THE AMOUNT OF CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS
 SUBSECTION FOR ANY TAXABLE YEAR EXCEEDS  THE  TAXPAYER'S  TAX  FOR  SUCH
 YEAR,  THE  EXCESS WILL NOT BE TREATED AS AN OVERPAYMENT OF TAX AND WILL
 NOT BE CREDITED OR REFUNDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION
 SIX HUNDRED EIGHTY-SIX OF THIS ARTICLE.
  § 3. This act shall take effect immediately and shall apply to taxable
 years beginning on and after January 1, 2024.
 
  PART D
 
  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section  669-i
 to read as follows:
  §  669-I.  THE  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  MERIT AND MOBILITY SCHOLARSHIP. 1.
 PURPOSE.  THE COMMUNITY COLLEGE MERIT AND MOBILITY SCHOLARSHIP IS HEREBY
 A. 6303  6
 
 ESTABLISHED FOR THE PURPOSE OF  GRANTING  MERIT  BASED  SCHOLARSHIPS  TO
 STUDENTS  WHO ATTEND A NEW YORK STATE COMMUNITY COLLEGE AND ARE ENROLLED
 IN CAREER EDUCATION AS DEFINED IN SUBDIVISION TWENTY-FOUR OF SECTION TWO
 OF THIS CHAPTER.
  2. ELIGIBILITY. TO BE ELIGIBLE FOR SUCH AWARDS, AN APPLICANT MUST HAVE
 GRADUATED FROM A NEW YORK STATE HIGH SCHOOL WITHIN THE TOP FORTY PERCENT
 OF HIS OR HER HIGH SCHOOL CLASS AND ACHIEVE THE FOLLOWING:
  A. REMAIN IN GOOD ACADEMIC STANDING, AND
  B. MAINTAIN A GRADE POINT AVERAGE OF 3.0 OR ABOVE.
  3. AWARDS. ONE THOUSAND SCHOLARSHIPS SHALL BE AWARDED IN THE TWO THOU-
 SAND TWENTY-THREE--TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR ACADEMIC YEAR, AND THEREAFT-
 ER.  THE ANNUAL SCHOLARSHIP SHALL BE AWARDED TO ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS IN
 THE AMOUNT OF THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS PER YEAR  FOR  NOT  MORE  THAN  TWO
 ACADEMIC YEARS. THE MAXIMUM SCHOLARSHIP AWARD SHALL NOT EXCEED SIX THOU-
 SAND  DOLLARS.  THE  PRESIDENT  SHALL  PROMULGATE  RULES AND REGULATIONS
 NECESSARY TO MAKE SUCH SCHOLARSHIP AVAILABLE ON AN ANNUAL BASIS TO FULL-
 TIME RECIPIENTS OR PER CREDIT BASIS TO PART-TIME RECIPIENTS.  PART-TIME
 STUDENTS SHALL NOT BE IMPACTED BY THE TWO-YEAR ACADEMIC YEAR AWARD LIMI-
 TATION. UP TO ONE THOUSAND SCHOLARSHIPS MAY BE GRANTED TO NEW RECIPIENTS
 ANNUALLY.  THE  RECEIPT  OF  SUCH  SCHOLARSHIPS SHALL NOT AFFECT TUITION
 ASSISTANCE ELIGIBILITY.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE  AMOUNT  OF  THE  ANNUAL
 AWARD  EXCEED  THE  RECIPIENT'S  COST  OF  ATTENDANCE AT THE INSTITUTION
 ATTENDED. COST OF ATTENDANCE SHALL MEAN TUITION, REQUIRED FEES,  LABORA-
 TORY  AND  OTHER INSTRUCTION RELATED TO EXPENSES, BOOKS, TRANSPORTATION,
 AND ROOM AND BOARD.
  4. PRIORITY. IN THE EVENT THAT THERE ARE MORE APPLICANTS WHO HAVE  THE
 SAME PRIORITY THAN THERE ARE REMAINING SCHOLARSHIPS, THE PRESIDENT SHALL
 DISTRIBUTE  THE  REMAINING  NUMBER  OF  SUCH  SCHOLARSHIPS BY MEANS OF A
 LOTTERY OR OTHER FORM OF RANDOM SELECTION.
  5. RULES. THE CORPORATION IS AUTHORIZED TO PROMULGATE RULES AND  REGU-
 LATIONS,  AND  MAY  PROMULGATE  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS, FOR THE NECESSARY
 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.
  § 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law.
 
  PART E
 
  Section 1. Section 1950 of the education law is amended  by  adding  a
 new subdivision 1-a to read as follows:
  1-A.  ON  AND  AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SUBDIVISION ALL EDUCA-
 TIONAL PROGRAMS PROVIDED OR OPERATED BY A BOARD  OF  COOPERATIVE  EDUCA-
 TIONAL  SERVICES SHALL BE KNOWN AS "CAREER PREP CENTERS".  UPON APPLICA-
 TION BY A BOARD OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES, THERE SHALL BE PAID
 TO EACH QUALIFYING BOARD OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES  AN  AMOUNT
 UP TO TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR THE PURPOSES OF MARKETING OF SUCH SCHOOLS
 AS CAREER PREP CENTERS AND FOR THE REPLACEMENT OF SIGNS AND OTHER PRINT-
 ED  MATERIALS.  A  BOARD  OF  COOPERATIVE  EDUCATIONAL SERVICES SHALL BE
 REQUIRED TO EXPEND ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS FROM EXISTING FUNDS TOWARD  SUCH
 MARKETING  OR  SIGN  REPLACEMENT  TO  BE ELIGIBLE FOR A GRANT UNDER THIS
 SUBDIVISION. SIGNS AND MATERIALS DEVELOPED PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF
 THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL BEAR THE PHRASE "CAREER PREP CENTERS:  FOUNDATION
 FOR YOUR FUTURE".
  § 2. The sum of three hundred eighty thousand dollars  ($380,000),  or
 so  much  thereof  as  may  be  necessary, is hereby appropriated to the
 department of education out of any moneys in the state treasury  in  the
 general  fund  to the credit of the local assistance account, not other-
 A. 6303  7
 
 wise appropriated, and made immediately available, for  the  purpose  of
 carrying out the provisions of this act. Such moneys shall be payable on
 the  audit  and  warrant  of  the  comptroller  on vouchers certified or
 approved  by  the  commissioner of education in the manner prescribed by
 law.
  § 3. By January first of each  year,  the  commissioner  of  education
 shall  issue a report to the governor and the legislature concerning the
 effectiveness of marketing education  programs  provided  by  boards  of
 cooperative  educational  services pursuant to the provision of subdivi-
 sion 1-a of section 1950 of the education law as added by section one of
 this act.
  § 4. This act shall take effect on the first of July  next  succeeding
 the date on which it shall have become a law.
 
  PART F
 
  Section  1. Paragraph b of subdivision 5 of section 1950 of the educa-
 tion law, as amended by chapter 130 of the laws of 2022, is  amended  to
 read as follows:
  b.  The  cost of services herein referred to shall be the amount allo-
 cated to each component school district  by  the  board  of  cooperative
 educational  services  to  defray  expenses  of  such  board,  including
 approved expenses from the testing of potable water systems of  occupied
 school  buildings under the board's jurisdiction as required pursuant to
 section eleven hundred ten of the public health law provided  that  such
 expenses  for testing of potable water systems are not reimbursable from
 another state or federal source, except that that  part  of  the  salary
 paid  any  teacher, supervisor or other employee of the board of cooper-
 ative educational services which is in excess of thirty thousand dollars
 shall not be such an approved expense, and except also that  administra-
 tive  and  clerical  expenses  shall not exceed ten percent of the total
 expenses for purposes of  this  computation.  PROVIDED  HOWEVER,  THAT
 BEGINNING  IN  THE  TWO  THOUSAND TWENTY-THREE--TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR
 SCHOOL YEAR, THAT PART OF THE SALARY PAID TO ANY  CAREER  AND  TECHNICAL
 EDUCATION  TEACHER, SUPERVISOR OR OTHER EMPLOYEE OF THE BOARD OF COOPER-
 ATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES WHICH IS IN  EXCESS  OF  THIRTY-SIX  THOUSAND
 DOLLARS  SHALL  NOT  BE  SUCH  AN APPROVED EXPENSE; BEGINNING IN THE TWO
 THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR--TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE SCHOOL YEAR, THAT PART OF
 THE SALARY PAID TO ANY CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION TEACHER,  SUPERVI-
 SOR  OR  OTHER  EMPLOYEE  OF A BOARD OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES
 WHICH IS IN EXCESS OF FORTY-TWO THOUSAND DOLLARS SHALL NOT  BE  SUCH  AN
 APPROVED  EXPENSE;  BEGINNING IN THE TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE--TWO THOU-
 SAND TWENTY-SIX SCHOOL YEAR, THAT PART OF THE SALARY PAID ANY CAREER AND
 TECHNICAL EDUCATION TEACHER, SUPERVISOR OR OTHER EMPLOYEE OF  THE  BOARD
 OF  COOPERATIVE  EDUCATIONAL  SERVICES WHICH IS IN EXCESS OF FORTY-EIGHT
 THOUSAND DOLLARS SHALL NOT BE SUCH AN APPROVED EXPENSE; BEGINNING IN THE
 TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-SIX--TWO THOUSAND  TWENTY-SEVEN  SCHOOL  YEAR,  THAT
 PART  OF  THE  SALARY  PAID  ANY CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION TEACHER,
 SUPERVISOR OR OTHER EMPLOYEE OF THE  BOARD  OF  COOPERATIVE  EDUCATIONAL
 SERVICES  WHICH IS IN EXCESS OF FIFTY-FOUR THOUSAND DOLLARS SHALL NOT BE
 SUCH AN APPROVED EXPENSE AND PROVIDED FURTHER BEGINNING IN THE TWO THOU-
 SAND TWENTY-SEVEN--TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-EIGHT SCHOOL YEAR AND THEREAFTER,
 THE ACTUAL SALARY OR THE AVERAGE STATEWIDE SALARY AS ESTABLISHED BY  THE
 COMMISSIONER,  WHICHEVER IS LESS, SHALL BE PAID FOR ANY CAREER AND TECH-
 NICAL EDUCATION TEACHER, SUPERVISOR OR OTHER EMPLOYEE OF  THE  BOARD  OF
 COOPERATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES; PROVIDED FURTHER THAT BEGINNING IN THE
 A. 6303  8

 TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-TWO--TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-THREE SCHOOL YEAR AND EVERY
 YEAR THEREAFTER, THE COST OF SERVICES PROVIDED BY ANY CAREER AND TECHNI-
 CAL  EDUCATION  TEACHER,  SUPERVISOR  OR  OTHER EMPLOYEE OF THE BOARD OF
 COOPERATIVE  EDUCATIONAL  SERVICES THAT IS CERTIFIED BY THE COMMISSIONER
 TO BE OF SUFFICIENT RIGOR  TO  MEET  NATIONAL  STANDARDS  SHALL  BE  ONE
 HUNDRED PERCENT OF SUCH SALARY OR THE AVERAGE STATEWIDE SALARY, WHICHEV-
 ER  IS  LESS  AS DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER. Any gifts, donations or
 interest earned by the board of cooperative educational services  or  on
 behalf of the board of cooperative educational services by the dormitory
 authority  or  any other source shall not be deducted in determining the
 cost of services  allocated  to  each  component  school  district.  Any
 payments made to a component school district by the board of cooperative
 educational  services pursuant to subdivision eleven of section six-p of
 the general municipal law attributable to an approved  cost  of  service
 computed pursuant to this subdivision shall be deducted from the cost of
 services  allocated  to  such  component school district. The expense of
 transportation provided by the board of cooperative educational services
 pursuant to paragraph q of subdivision four of  this  section  shall  be
 eligible  for  aid  apportioned pursuant to subdivision seven of section
 thirty-six hundred two of this  chapter  and  no  board  of  cooperative
 educational services transportation expense shall be an approved cost of
 services for the computation of aid under this subdivision.  Transporta-
 tion expense pursuant to paragraph q of subdivision four of this section
 shall  be  included  in the computation of the ten percent limitation on
 administrative and clerical expenses.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  PART G
 
  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 319 to
 read as follows:
  § 319. LEARNING FOR WORK PROGRAM.  THE COMMISSIONER,  IN  CONSULTATION
 WITH THE COMMISSIONER OF LABOR, SHALL ESTABLISH AND IMPLEMENT A LEARNING
 FOR WORK PROGRAM TO ADDRESS THE "MIDDLE-SKILLS" GAP IN THIS STATE BY THE
 TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE--TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-SIX SCHOOL YEAR. TO IMPLE-
 MENT SUCH PROGRAM, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL:
  1.  IMPLEMENT  A  "LEARNING  FOR  WORK K-12 INFORMATION INITIATIVE" TO
 INTRODUCE AGE-APPROPRIATE CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION  PROGRAMS,  AND
 THEIR BENEFITS, TO STUDENTS AND PARENTS BEGINNING IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL;
  2.  DEVELOP CAREER OPEN HOUSE PROGRAMS WITH LOCAL BUSINESSES TO INTRO-
 DUCE STUDENTS AND PARENTS TO THE BENEFITS OF BOCES, CAREER AND TECHNICAL
 EDUCATION PROGRAMS, AND THE CORRELATION TO  FUTURE  EMPLOYMENT  OPPORTU-
 NITIES IN THEIR COMMUNITIES;
  3. ENSURE ALL SCHOOL DISTRICTS WITHIN A BOCES REGION ACCEPT CREDITS IN
 ORDER TO SATISFY GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS;
  4.  PROVIDE  ADDITIONAL TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS FOR STUDENTS INTERESTED
 IN BOCES, INCLUDING EXPANDING PROGRAMS WITHIN A STUDENT'S OWN SCHOOL  TO
 ENSURE GREATER ACCESS TO WORK-BASED LEARNING PROGRAMS;
  5.  EXPLORE  CREATING REGIONAL ADVISORY BOARDS BETWEEN BOCES DISTRICTS
 TO ALLOW FOR GREATER COHESIVENESS AND PARTNERSHIPS;
  6. CONSIDER IMPLEMENTING FULL-DAY BOCES PROGRAMS;
  7. UTILIZE THE "LEARNING FOR  WORK  K-12  INFORMATION  INITIATIVE"  TO
 PROVIDE  INFORMATION  VIA  TOURS, SEMINARS, ADVERTISING, PARENT INVOLVE-
 MENT, AND OTHER AVENUES TO STUDENTS AT AN EARLIER AGE TO ENSURE THEY ARE
 AWARE OF THE PATHWAYS IN TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM  (P-TECH)  AND  THE  OPTIONS
 AVAILABLE TO THEM REGARDING SUCH PROGRAM;
 A. 6303  9
 
  8.  EXPAND  AWARENESS  OF P-TECH TO STUDENTS PRIOR TO NINTH GRADE, AND
 INCREASE THE NUMBER OF AVAILABLE OPENINGS  FOR  STUDENTS  INTERESTED  IN
 ATTENDING P-TECH;
  9. INCORPORATE PROFESSIONAL/SOFT-SKILLS EDUCATION AS A MAJOR COMPONENT
 IN BOTH P-TECH AND GENERAL PUBLIC SCHOOL EDUCATION;
  10.  CREATE  ADDITIONAL GRADUATION PATHWAYS WITH SPECIFIC ENDORSEMENTS
 TO ASSIST STUDENTS IN FINDING GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT;
  11.  CONTINUE  TO  SUPPORT  THE  RECOGNITION  OF  WORKFORCE-IDENTIFIED
 CREDENTIALS AND CERTIFICATIONS FOR STUDENTS ENROLLED IN P-TECH AND OTHER
 EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS;
  12.  CONTINUE  TO  SUPPORT AND PROMOTE P-TECH TO PROVIDE STUDENTS WITH
 OPPORTUNITIES INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CAREER  TRAINING,  HANDS-ON
 WORK, AND EMPLOYMENT UPON COMPLETION OF THE PROGRAM;
  13. INCREASE THE NUMBER OF TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMS
 OFFERED  BY STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK AND CITY UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK
 INSTITUTIONS;
  14. CREATE MORE CAREER AND TECHNICAL  EDUCATION  TEACHER  PROGRAMS  AT
 STATE  UNIVERSITY  OF  NEW  YORK  AND CITY UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK INSTI-
 TUTIONS TO EXPAND SPECIALIZED INSTRUCTION IN SCHOOLS;
  15. CLARIFY DEPARTMENT OF LABOR RULES REGARDING  YOUTH  APPRENTICESHIP
 PROGRAMS IN THE WORKPLACE;
  16. CONSOLIDATE THE OPERATIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT AND THE DEPARTMENT OF
 LABOR WITH RELATION TO CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION AND APPRENTICESHIP
 PROGRAMS INTO ONE ENTITY THAT INCLUDES APPRENTICESHIP NAVIGATORS TO HELP
 BUSINESSES  AND  ASPIRING APPRENTICES SUCCESSFULLY IMPLEMENT OR COMPLETE
 WORK-BASED LEARNING PROGRAMS;
  17. CREATE AN EASY-TO-NAVIGATE, CENTRALIZED WEBSITE THAT WOULD INCLUDE
 ALL INFORMATION RELATED TO APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS IN  NEW  YORK  STATE,
 SPECIFICALLY INFORMATION FOR: NEW YORKERS INTERESTED IN BECOMING APPREN-
 TICES; EMPLOYERS LOOKING FOR INFORMATION TO START A PROGRAM; EDUCATIONAL
 INSTITUTIONS LOOKING TO START A PROGRAM; AND ANY OTHER RELEVANT INFORMA-
 TION;
  18.  EASE  AND  STANDARDIZE THE CERTIFICATION PROCESS TO ALLOW GREATER
 FLEXIBILITY FOR LOCAL SCHOOL DISTRICTS INTERESTED IN CREATING THEIR  OWN
 PROGRAMS;
  19.  CREATE  GRANTS  OR  SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAMS FOR CAREER AND TECHNICAL
 EDUCATION STUDENTS WHO NEED PHYSICAL EQUIPMENT FOR THEIR APPRENTICESHIPS
 AND/OR WORK-BASED LEARNING EXPERIENCES;
  20. ADOPT A NATIONALLY-RECOGNIZED STANDARDIZED ASSESSMENT OF SKILLS;
  21. AUTOMATICALLY GRANT COLLEGE CREDITS TO A STUDENT IN THEIR SPECIFIC
 APPRENTICESHIP DISCIPLINE;
  22. SPECIFY THE EXPECTATIONS FOR TEACHING PROFESSIONAL/SOFT-SKILLS  IN
 ANY YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM;
  23.  ADD  BOCES  TO ENTITIES ELIGIBLE TO TAKE PART IN A LOCAL PARTNER-
 SHIP;
  24. ENSURE STUDENTS OF  ALL  SOCIOECONOMIC  BACKGROUNDS  ARE  ABLE  TO
 PARTICIPATE IN THE LOCAL YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM BY PROVIDING FUND-
 ING FOR TRANSPORTATION, EQUIPMENT, OR ANY OTHER MATERIALS;
  25. ALLOW FOR PARTICIPATION IN PROGRAMS BEGINNING IN A STUDENT'S NINTH
 GRADE YEAR; AND
  26.  SPECIFY  EMPLOYER OBLIGATIONS FOR HIRING STUDENTS UPON SUCCESSFUL
 COMPLETION OF A YOUTH APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.
  § 2. The department of education and the  department  of  labor  shall
 promulgate any rules and regulations necessary for the implementation of
 the learning for work program by the two thousand twenty-five--two thou-
 sand twenty-six school year.
 A. 6303  10
 
  § 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
  § 4. Severability clause. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivi-
 sion,  section  or  part  of  this act shall be adjudged by any court of
 competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment  shall  not  affect,
 impair,  or  invalidate  the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in
 its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,  subdivision,  section
 or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judg-
 ment shall have been rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
 the  legislature  that  this  act  would  have been enacted even if such
 invalid provisions had not been included herein.
  § 5. This act shall take effect immediately; provided,  however,  that
 the applicable effective dates of Parts A through G of this act shall be
 as specifically set forth in the last section of such Parts.