# Prohibits any entity which is contracted to operate the Long Island power authority from lobbying; requires Long Island power authority employees be residents of such authority's service area

**Bill ID:** A6313
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Keith Brown
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A6313 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6313)

## Summary

Prohibits any entity which is contracted to operate the Long Island power authority from lobbying; requires Long Island power authority employees be residents of such authority's service area.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6313
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. K. BROWN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  legislative law, in relation to prohibiting any
  entity which is contracted to operate the Long Island power  authority
  from lobbying; and to amend the public authorities law, in relation to
  requiring  Long  Island power authority employees be residents of such
  authority's service area
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section 1-d of the legislative law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision (i) to read as follows:
  (I) PROHIBIT ANY LOBBYING OR ADVERTISING  FROM  ANY  ENTITY  WHICH  IS
 CONTRACTED TO OPERATE THE LONG ISLAND POWER AUTHORITY.
  ยง 2. Title 1-A of article 5 of the public authorities law, as added by
 chapter  517  of  the  laws  of 1986, is amended by adding a new section
 1020-nn to read as follows:
  ยง 1020-NN. RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT. THE AUTHORITY SHALL NOT  EMPLOY  ANY
 PERSON  WHO  IS  NOT A RESIDENT OF THE SERVICE AREA OF THE AUTHORITY. AN
 ENTITY WHICH IS CONTRACTED TO OPERATE THE AUTHORITY SHALL NOT EMPLOY  IN
 ANY  POSITION  WHICH  IS  IN  ANY  WAY ASSOCIATED WITH THE AUTHORITY ANY
 PERSON WHO IS NOT A RESIDENT OF THE SERVICE AREA OF THE AUTHORITY.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect one year after it shall have become  a
 law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07463-01-3