# Relates to returnable bottles; repealer

**Bill ID:** A6353AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Deborah Glick
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A6353AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A6353AA)

## Summary

Relates to returnable bottles; adds noncarbonated soft drinks, certain noncarbonated fruit or vegetable juices, coffee and tea beverages, carbonated fruit beverages and cider to the definition of "beverage"; provides that beginning April 1, 2026, the handling fee will be six cents for each beverage container accepted by a deposit initiator from a dealer or operator of a redemption center.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6353--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 5, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  GLICK,  FAHY, SIMON, DINOWITZ, L. ROSENTHAL,
  GALLAGHER, RAMOS,  PAULIN,  AUBRY,  CARROLL,  GONZALEZ-ROJAS,  SIMONE,
  BURGOS,  REYES,  RIVERA,  COLTON,  BURDICK,  DE LOS SANTOS,  LAVINE,
  O'DONNELL, SHIMSKY, DICKENS, EPSTEIN, STECK,  ALVAREZ,  RAGA,  THIELE,
  LEVENBERG,  BORES, STIRPE, ARDILA, LUNSFORD, SILLITTI, HEVESI, SAYEGH,
  KIM,  ZINERMAN,  GUNTHER,  SHRESTHA,  OTIS,  WALLACE,  TAYLOR,
  BICHOTTE HERMELYN,  FORREST,  MAMDANI,  CLARK,  BRONSON,  SEAWRIGHT,
  KELLES, LUCAS, McMAHON, WEPRIN  --  read  once  and  referred  to  the
  Committee  on Environmental Conservation -- recommitted to the Commit-
  tee on Environmental Conservation in accordance with Assembly Rule  3,
  sec.  2  --  committee  discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as
  amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the  environmental  conservation  law,  in  relation  to
  returnable bottles; and to repeal section 27-1018 of such law relating
  to the beverage container assistance program
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 1  of  section  27-1003  of  the  environmental
 conservation  law,  as  amended by section 2 of part SS of chapter 59 of
 the laws of 2009, is amended to read as follows:
  1. "Beverage" means carbonated soft drinks, NONCARBONATED SOFT DRINKS,
 NONCARBONATED FRUIT OR VEGETABLE JUICES CONTAINING LESS THAN ONE HUNDRED
 PERCENT FRUIT OR VEGETABLE JUICE, COFFEE AND TEA  BEVERAGES,  CARBONATED
 FRUIT  BEVERAGES, water, beer, other malt beverages, CIDER AS DEFINED IN
 SECTION THREE OF THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL LAW, and [a] wine [prod-
 uct] PRODUCTS as defined in [subdivision thirty-six-a of] section  three
 of the alcoholic beverage control law. "Malt beverages" means any bever-
 age  obtained  by the alcoholic fermentation or infusion or decoction of
 barley, malt, hops, or other wholesome grain or cereal and water includ-
 ing, but not limited to ale, stout or malt  liquor.  "Water"  means  any
 beverage  identified through the use of letters, words or symbols on its
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00531-16-4
 A. 6353--A  2
 
 product label as a type of water, including any flavored water or nutri-
 tionally enhanced water[,  provided,  however,  that  "water"  does  not
 include  any beverage identified as a type of water to which a sugar has
 been added].
  §  2.  Subdivision 1 of section 27-1003 of the environmental conserva-
 tion law, as amended by section one of this act, is amended to  read  as
 follows:
  1.  "Beverage"  means  [carbonated  soft  drinks,  noncarbonated  soft
 drinks, noncarbonated fruit or vegetable juices containing less than one
 hundred percent fruit or vegetable  juice,  coffee  and  tea  beverages,
 carbonated  fruit beverages, water, beer, other malt beverages, cider as
 defined in section three of the alcoholic beverage control  law,  and  a
 wine  product  as  defined  in  section  three of the alcoholic beverage
 control law. "Malt beverages" means any beverage obtained by  the  alco-
 holic  fermentation  or  infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or
 other wholesome grain or cereal and water including, but not limited  to
 ale, stout or malt liquor. "Water" means any beverage identified through
 the  use  of letters, words or symbols on its product label as a type of
 water, including any flavored water or nutritionally enhanced water] ANY
 DRINKABLE LIQUID INTENDED FOR HUMAN ORAL CONSUMPTION. THE TERM  BEVERAGE
 DOES  NOT  INCLUDE:  A  DRUG REGULATED UNDER THE FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND
 COSMETIC ACT, 21 U.S.C. 301 ET SEQ.; INFANT FORMULA; A MEAL  REPLACEMENT
 LIQUID;  DAIRY  PRODUCTS  DERIVED  FROM  ANIMAL  MILK; PLANT-BASED DAIRY
 ALTERNATIVES; AND NONCARBONATED FRUIT OR VEGETABLE JUICES CONTAINING ONE
 HUNDRED PERCENT FRUIT OR VEGETABLE JUICE.
  § 3. Subdivisions 8 and 12 of section  27-1003  of  the  environmental
 conservation  law,  subdivision 8 as added by chapter 200 of the laws of
 1982 and subdivision 12 as added by section 3 of part SS of  chapter  59
 of  the  laws of 2009, are amended and five new subdivisions 14, 15, 16,
 17 and 18 are added to read as follows:
  8. "Redeemer" means every person who demands the refund value provided
 for herein in exchange for the empty beverage container,  REGARDLESS  OF
 PERSONAL  PURCHASE  OF  THE  BEVERAGE CONTAINER, but shall not include a
 dealer as defined in subdivision four of this section.
  12. "Reverse vending machine" means an automated device  that  uses  a
 laser  scanner, microprocessor, or other technology to accurately recog-
 nize the universal product code (UPC) on containers to determine if  the
 container is redeemable and accumulates information regarding containers
 redeemed,  including  the  number  of  such containers redeemed, thereby
 enabling the reverse vending machine to accept containers from redeemers
 and to issue LEGAL TENDER OR a scrip [or], receipt,  OR  OTHER  FORM  OF
 CREDIT  for  their  refund  value.  SUCH  DEFINITION SHALL ALSO APPLY TO
 ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY APPROVED BY THE COMMISSIONER PURSUANT TO SUBPARA-
 GRAPH (III) OF PARAGRAPH (B) OF SUBDIVISION ONE OF  SECTION  27-1007  OF
 THIS  TITLE.  NOTHING IN THIS DEFINITION SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO RELIEVE A
 DEALER SPECIFIED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (III) OF PARAGRAPH (B)  OF  SUBDIVISION
 ONE  OF  SECTION  27-1007 OF THIS TITLE OF THE REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE AN
 IMMEDIATE FORM OF DEPOSIT REPAYMENT IF THE REVERSE  VENDING  MACHINE  OR
 ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY DOES NOT PROVIDE SUCH.
  14. "REFILLABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER" MEANS ANY BEVERAGE CONTAINER WHICH
 IS  SO CONSTRUCTED AND DESIGNED THAT IT IS STRUCTURALLY CAPABLE OF BEING
 REFILLED AND RESOLD AT LEAST FIFTY TIMES BY A BEVERAGE MANUFACTURER, AND
 WHICH THE BEVERAGE MANUFACTURER REQUIRES TO BE RETURNED FOR THE  PURPOSE
 OF REFILLING AND RESALE.
  15. "RETURN AND REUSABLE SYSTEM" MEANS A REFILLABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
 REUSE  SYSTEM  THAT FEATURES AN OPERATIONAL AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENT IN
 A. 6353--A  3
 
 WHICH REFILLABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS ARE COLLECTED FOR WASHING AND REUS-
 ING. THE DISTANCES BETWEEN EACH POINT OF THE SYSTEM SHALL BE NO  GREATER
 THAN TWO HUNDRED MILES.
  16. "REDEMPTION RATE" MEANS THE PERCENTAGE OF BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD
 THAT ARE REDEEMED FOR DEPOSIT VALUE.
  17. "RECYCLING" MEANS TO SEPARATE, DISMANTLE OR PROCESS THE MATERIALS,
 COMPONENTS  OR  COMMODITIES  CONTAINED  IN  DISCARDS  FOR THE PURPOSE OF
 PREPARING THE MATERIALS, COMPONENTS, OR COMMODITIES FOR USE OR REUSE  IN
 NEW PRODUCTS OR COMPONENTS. "RECYCLING" SHALL NOT INCLUDE:
  (A)  ENERGY RECOVERY OR  ENERGY GENERATION BY ANY MEANS, INCLUDING BUT
 NOT LIMITED TO,  COMBUSTION,  INCINERATION,  PYROLYSIS,  GASIFICATION,
 SOLVOLYSIS, OR WASTE-TO-FUEL;
  (B)  ANY  CHEMICAL  CONVERSION  PROCESS; OR
  (C) LANDFILL DISPOSAL.
  18.  "RECYCLING  RATE"  MEANS  THE  PERCENTAGE  OF  REDEEMED  BEVERAGE
 CONTAINERS THAT ARE ULTIMATELY RECYCLED. THE  RECYCLING  RATE  SHALL  BE
 CALCULATED  AS THE TOTAL WEIGHT OF BEVERAGE CONTAINERS THAT ARE RECYCLED
 IN A GIVEN YEAR DIVIDED BY  THE  TOTAL  WEIGHT  OF  BEVERAGE  CONTAINERS
 GENERATED BY A DISTRIBUTOR IN THAT YEAR.
  §  4.  Section 27-1007 of the environmental conservation law, as added
 by section 4 of part SS of chapter 59 of the laws of 2009, paragraph (b)
 of subdivision 1 as amended by chapter 459 of  the  laws  of  2011,  and
 subdivision 12 as added by section 3 of part F of chapter 58 of the laws
 of 2013, is amended to read as follows:
 § 27-1007. Mandatory acceptance.
  Except as provided in section 27-1009 of this title:
  1.  (a)  A  dealer shall accept at [his or her] SUCH DEALER'S place of
 business from a redeemer any empty beverage containers  of  the  design,
 shape,  size,  color,  composition and brand sold or offered for sale by
 the dealer, and shall pay to the redeemer the refund value of each  such
 beverage  container  as  established  in  section 27-1005 of this title.
 Redemptions of refund value must be in  legal  tender,  or  a  scrip  or
 receipt  from  a  reverse  vending  machine,  provided that the scrip or
 receipt can be exchanged for legal tender for a period of not less  than
 sixty  days without requiring the purchase of other goods.  IN THE EVENT
 SUCH SCRIP OR RECEIPT EXPIRES, SUCH SCRIP OR RECEIPT MUST  INDICATE  ANY
 EXPIRATION  DATE  AND THE DEALER MUST POST A CONSPICUOUS SIGN INDICATING
 HOW MANY DAYS A REDEEMER HAS TO EXCHANGE THE SCRIP OR RECEIPT FOR  LEGAL
 TENDER.  IF  SUCH NOTIFICATION IS NOT PROVIDED, A DEALER MUST REDEEM THE
 FULL REFUND VALUE INDICATED ON ANY LEGIBLE SCRIP OR RECEIPT. The use  or
 presence  of a reverse vending machine shall not relieve a dealer of any
 obligations imposed pursuant to this section. If  a  dealer  utilizes  a
 reverse  vending  machine to redeem containers, the dealer shall provide
 redemption of beverage containers when the reverse  vending  machine  is
 full,  broken,  under  repair  or  does  not  accept  a type of beverage
 container sold or offered for sale by such dealer and may not limit  the
 hours  or  days of redemption except as provided by subdivision three of
 this section.  ALL DEALERS AND REDEMPTION CENTERS SHALL PROVIDE  CONSUM-
 ERS THE ABILITY TO RECYCLE ANY CONTAINERS DEEMED UNREDEEMABLE.
  (b)  Beginning  March first, two thousand ten, a dealer whose place of
 business is part of a chain engaged in the same general field  of  busi-
 ness  which operates ten or more units in this state under common owner-
 ship and whose business has at least: (i) forty thousand but  less  than
 sixty  thousand  square  feet  devoted to the display of merchandise for
 sale to the public shall install and maintain at least two reverse vend-
 ing machines at the dealer's place of business; (ii) sixty thousand  but
 A. 6353--A  4
 
 less  than  eighty-five  thousand  square feet devoted to the display of
 merchandise for sale to the public shall install and maintain  at  least
 three  reverse  vending  machines  at the dealer's place of business; or
 (iii)  eighty-five  thousand  square  feet  devoted  to  the  display of
 merchandise for sale to the public shall install and maintain  at  least
 four  reverse  vending  machines  at the dealer's place of business. The
 requirements of [paragraph (b) of] this subdivision to install and main-
 tain reverse vending machines shall not apply  to  a  dealer  that:  (i)
 sells  only  beverage  containers  of  twenty  ounces or less where such
 beverage containers are packaged in  quantities  fewer  than  six;  (ii)
 sells  beverage  containers and devotes no more than five percent of its
 floor space to the display and sale of consumer commodities, as  defined
 in section two hundred fourteen-h of the agriculture and markets law; or
 (iii)  obtains  a  waiver  from  the commissioner authorizing dealers to
 provide consumers with an alternative technology that: (A) determines if
 the container is redeemable,  (B)  provides  protections  against  fraud
 through  a  system that validates each container redeemed by reading the
 universal product code and, except with respect to  refillable  contain-
 ers,  renders  the  container  unredeemable, (C) accumulates information
 regarding containers redeemed, and (D) issues legal tender, or a  scrip,
 receipt,  or  other  form  of  credit  for the refund value, that can be
 exchanged for legal tender for a period of  not  less  than  sixty  days
 without  requiring  the purchase of other goods AND INCLUDES ANY EXPIRA-
 TION DATE ON THE SCRIP, RECEIPT, OR OTHER FORM OF CREDIT.  Notwithstand-
 ing  the foregoing, if the alternative technology does not allow consum-
 ers to immediately obtain the refund value of the redeemed container,  a
 dealer  shall be permitted to deploy such alternative technology only if
 it also offers an alternative that allows consumers to conveniently  and
 immediately  obtain  such refund value through a reverse vending machine
 or other alternative method.
  (c) A dealer to which paragraph (b) of this subdivision does not apply
 and whose place of business is at least forty thousand square feet which
 does not utilize reverse vending  machines  to  process  empty  beverage
 containers  for redemption shall: (i) establish and maintain a dedicated
 area within such business to accept beverage containers for  redemption;
 (ii)  adequately  staff such area to facilitate efficient acceptance and
 processing of such containers during business hours; and (iii) post  one
 or  more conspicuous signs conforming to the size and color requirements
 described in subdivision two of this section at each public entrance  to
 the  business  which describes where in the business the redemption area
 is located. The commissioner may  establish  in  rules  and  regulations
 additional standards for the efficient processing of beverage containers
 by such dealers.
  (d)  For  the purposes of this subdivision on any day that a dealer is
 open for less than twenty-four hours, the dealer may restrict or  refuse
 the  payment  of refund values during the first and last hour the dealer
 is open for business.
  2. A dealer shall post a conspicuous sign, at the point of sale,  that
 states:
  "NEW YORK BOTTLE BILL OF RIGHTS
 
  STATE LAW REQUIRES US TO REDEEM EMPTY RETURNABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS OF
  THE SAME TYPE AND BRAND THAT WE SELL OR OFFER FOR SALE
 
 YOU  HAVE  CERTAIN  RIGHTS UNDER THE NEW YORK STATE RETURNABLE CONTAINER
 ACT:
 A. 6353--A  5
 
  THE RIGHT to return your empties for refund to any  dealer  who  sells
 the  same brand, type and size, whether you bought the beverage from the
 dealer or not. It is illegal to return containers for  refund  that  you
 did not pay a deposit on in New York state.
  THE  RIGHT  to  get  your  deposit  refund  in  cash, without proof of
 purchase.
  THE RIGHT to return your empties any day, any  hour,  except  for  the
 first  and  last hour of the dealer's business day (empty containers may
 be redeemed at any time in 24-hour stores).
  THE RIGHT to return your containers if  they  are  empty  and  intact.
 Washing  containers  is not required by law, but is strongly recommended
 to maintain sanitary conditions.
  The New York state returnable container act can be enforced by the New
 York state department of environmental conservation, the New York  state
 department  of agriculture and markets, the New York state department of
 taxation and finance, the New York state attorney general and/or by your
 local government."
  Such sign must be no less than eight inches by ten inches in size  and
 have  lettering a minimum of one quarter inch high, and of a color which
 contrasts with the background. The department shall maintain a toll free
 telephone number for a "bottle bill complaint line" that shall be avail-
 able from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. each business day to receive reports of
 violations of this title. The telephone number shall be  listed  on  any
 sign required by this section.
  3.  On  or after June first, two thousand nine, a dealer may limit the
 number of empty beverage containers to be accepted for redemption at the
 dealer's place of business to no less than  seventy-two  containers  per
 visit, per redeemer, per day, provided that:
  (a) The dealer has a written agreement with a redemption center, be it
 either  at  a  fixed physical location within the same county and within
 [one-half] ONE mile of the dealer's  place  of  business,  or  a  mobile
 redemption  center,  operated  by  a  redemption center, that is located
 within one-quarter mile of the dealer's place of business.  The  redemp-
 tion  center  must  have  a  written agreement with the dealer to accept
 containers on behalf of the dealer; and the redemption center's hours of
 operation must cover at least [9:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m.] EIGHT  HOURS
 daily  or in the case of a mobile redemption center, the hours of opera-
 tion must cover at least four consecutive hours between  8:00  a.m.  and
 8:00  p.m.  daily. The dealer must post a conspicuous, permanent sign,
 meeting the size and color specifications set forth in  subdivision  two
 of this section, open to public view, identifying the location and hours
 of  operation  of  the affiliated redemption center or mobile redemption
 center; and
  (b) The dealer provides, at a minimum, a consecutive two  hour  period
 between  7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. daily whereby the dealer will accept up
 to two hundred forty containers, per redeemer,  per  day,  and  posts  a
 conspicuous,  permanent  sign, meeting the size and color specifications
 set forth in subdivision two of this section, open to public view, iden-
 tifying those hours. The dealer may not change the hours  of  redemption
 without first posting a thirty day notice; and
  (c) The dealer's primary business is the sale of food or beverages for
 consumption  off-premises,  and  the  dealer's place of business is less
 than ten thousand square feet in size.
  4. A deposit initiator shall accept from a dealer  or  operator  of  a
 redemption  center  any  empty  beverage container of the design, shape,
 size, color, composition and brand sold  or  offered  for  sale  by  the
 A. 6353--A  6
 
 deposit  initiator, and shall pay the dealer or operator of a redemption
 center the refund value of each such beverage container  as  established
 by  section  27-1005 of this title. A deposit initiator shall accept and
 redeem  all  such  empty beverage containers from a dealer or redemption
 center without limitation on quantity.
  5. A deposit initiator's or distributor's failure  to  pick  up  empty
 beverage containers, including containers processed in a reverse vending
 machine,  from  a redemption center, dealer or the operator of a reverse
 vending machine, IN A TIMELY MANNER AND AT REASONABLE TIMES AS  PROVIDED
 BY  THE  DEPARTMENT  PURSUANT TO THE REGULATIONS PROMULGATED PURSUANT TO
 PARAGRAPH (C) OF SUBDIVISION EIGHT OF THIS SECTION shall be a  violation
 of this title.
  6.  In  addition to the refund value of a beverage container as estab-
 lished by section 27-1005 of this title, a deposit initiator  shall  pay
 to  any  dealer  or  operator  of  a redemption center a handling fee of
 [three and one-half] FIVE cents for each beverage container accepted  by
 the  deposit  initiator  from  such  dealer  or operator of a redemption
 center.  BEGINNING APRIL FIRST, TWO THOUSAND  TWENTY-SIX,  THE  HANDLING
 FEE SHALL BE SIX CENTS.  BEGINNING APRIL FIRST, TWO THOUSAND THIRTY-ONE,
 THE  HANDLING FEE SHALL BE SIX AND ONE-HALF CENTS. Payment of the handl-
 ing fee shall be as compensation for collecting, sorting  and  packaging
 of empty beverage containers for transport back to the deposit initiator
 or  its  designee. Payment of the handling fee may not be conditioned on
 the purchase of any goods or services, nor may such payment be made  out
 of  the  refund value account established pursuant to section 27-1012 of
 this title. A distributor who does not initiate deposits on  a  type  of
 beverage  container  is  considered  a  dealer  only  for the purpose of
 receiving a handling fee from a deposit initiator.
  7. A deposit initiator on a brand shall accept from a distributor  who
 does  not  initiate deposits on that brand any empty beverage containers
 of that brand accepted by the distributor from a dealer or operator of a
 redemption center and shall reimburse the distributor the  refund  value
 of  each  such  beverage container, as established by section 27-1005 of
 this title. In addition, the  deposit  initiator  shall  reimburse  such
 distributor  for  each  such  beverage container the handling fee estab-
 lished under subdivision six  of  this  section.  Without  limiting  the
 rights  of  the department or any person, firm or corporation under this
 subdivision or any other provision of this section, a distributor  shall
 have  a  civil  right  of action to enforce this subdivision, including,
 upon three days notice, the right to apply for temporary and preliminary
 injunctive relief against continuing violations, and until  arrangements
 for  collection  and return of empty containers or reimbursement of such
 distributor for such deposits and handling fees are made.
  8. It shall be the responsibility of the deposit initiator or distrib-
 utor to provide to a dealer or redemption center a sufficient number  of
 bags, cartons, or other suitable containers, at no cost, for the packag-
 ing,  handling  and  pickup  of  empty  beverage containers that are not
 redeemed through a  reverse  vending  machine.  The  bags,  cartons,  or
 containers must be provided by the deposit initiator or distributor on a
 schedule  that allows the dealer or redemption center sufficient time to
 sort the empty beverage containers prior  to  pick  up  by  the  deposit
 initiator or distributor. In addition:
  (a)  When picking up empty beverage containers, a deposit initiator or
 distributor shall not require a dealer  or  redemption  center  to  load
 their  own  bags,  cartons or containers onto or into the deposit initi-
 ator's or distributor's vehicle or vehicles  or  provide  the  staff  or
 A. 6353--A  7
 
 equipment  needed  to  do  so.  HOWEVER,  WHERE  PALLETS OR SKIDS, BAGS,
 CARTONS OR CONTAINERS ARE READILY MOVABLE ONLY BY MEANS OF A FORKLIFT OR
 SIMILAR EQUIPMENT, A DEPOSIT INITIATOR  OR  DISTRIBUTOR  MAY  REQUIRE  A
 DEALER  OR REDEMPTION CENTER TO MOVE OR LOAD SUCH ITEMS AT NO COST USING
 A FORKLIFT OR SIMILAR EQUIPMENT BELONGING TO THE  DEALER  OR  REDEMPTION
 CENTER  PROVIDED  THAT  SUCH EQUIPMENT AND APPROPRIATE STAFF ARE READILY
 AVAILABLE.
  (b) A  deposit  initiator  or  distributor  shall  not  require  empty
 containers  to be counted at a location other than the redemption center
 or dealer's place of business. The dealer  or  redemption  center  shall
 have the right to be present at the count. IN THE EVENT OF A DISCREPANCY
 BETWEEN  THE  COUNT  OF THE DEALER OR REDEMPTION CENTER AND THE COUNT OF
 THE DEPOSIT  INITIATOR  OR  DISTRIBUTOR  FOR  CONTAINERS  NOT  PROCESSED
 THROUGH  A  REVERSE  VENDING  MACHINE ALL SUCH EMPTY CONTAINERS SHALL BE
 RETAINED AND A RE-COUNT MAY BE REQUESTED. THE RE-COUNT MAY BE HELD AT  A
 LOCATION  OTHER THAN THE REDEMPTION CENTER OR DEALER'S PLACE OF BUSINESS
 ONLY IF THE DEALER OR REDEMPTION CENTER AGREES AND IS PRESENT.
  (c) A deposit initiator or distributor shall pick  up  empty  beverage
 containers  from  the dealer or redemption center IN A TIMELY MANNER AND
 at reasonable times [and intervals] as  determined  in  rules  or  regu-
 lations  promulgated  by  the  department NO LATER THAN APRIL FIRST, TWO
 THOUSAND TWENTY-SIX.
  9. No person shall return or assist another to return to a  dealer  or
 redemption  center  an  empty beverage container for its refund value if
 such container had previously been accepted for redemption by a  dealer,
 redemption center, or deposit initiator who initiates deposits on bever-
 age containers of the same brand.
  10.  A  redeemer,  dealer,  distributor or redemption center shall not
 knowingly redeem an empty beverage container  on  which  a  deposit  was
 never paid in New York state.
  11.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  subdivision  two of section
 27-1009 of this title, a deposit initiator or distributor  shall  accept
 and  redeem beverage containers as provided in this title, if the dealer
 or operator of a redemption center shall  have  accepted  and  paid  the
 refund value of such beverage containers.
  12. No person shall intentionally program, tamper with, render inaccu-
 rate, or circumvent the proper operation of a reverse vending machine to
 wrongfully  elicit  deposit  monies  when  no valid, redeemable beverage
 container has been placed in and properly processed by the reverse vend-
 ing machine.
  13. THE DEPARTMENT AND THE DEPARTMENT  OF  TAXATION  AND  FINANCE  ARE
 AUTHORIZED TO AUDIT ANY REVERSE VENDING MACHINE.
  14.  NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY PROVISION OF THIS SECTION TO THE CONTRARY, A
 DEALER SHALL NOT BE REQUIRED TO ACCEPT FROM A REDEEMER ANY EMPTY  BEVER-
 AGE  CONTAINER  AT  A  FARMERS'  MARKET  AS  SUCH TERM IS DEFINED BY THE
 DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND MARKETS.
  § 5. Subdivision 1 of section 27-1011 of the  environmental  conserva-
 tion law is amended by adding a new paragraph c to read as follows:
  C. EACH BEVERAGE CONTAINER SOLD OR OFFERED FOR SALE IN THIS STATE THAT
 HAS  A  REFUND  VALUE PURSUANT TO PARAGRAPH A OF THIS SUBDIVISION, SHALL
 INCLUDE A UNIVERSAL PRODUCT CODE AND BARCODE PRINTED ON THE  LABEL  THAT
 IS  READABLE  BY REVERSE VENDING MACHINE OR ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY. EACH
 DEPOSIT INITIATOR SHALL PROVIDE SUCH UNIVERSAL PRODUCT CODE AND  BARCODE
 AND  OWNERSHIP AND PACKAGING INFORMATION OF ANY SUCH BEVERAGE CONTAINER,
 TO THE DEPARTMENT NOT LESS THAN FORTY-FIVE DAYS PRIOR  TO  SUCH  PRODUCT
 BEING OFFERED FOR SALE IN THE STATE. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL, NOT MORE THAN
 A. 6353--A  8
 
 THIRTY  DAYS  AFTER  RECEIPT  OF SUCH INFORMATION, MAKE THIS INFORMATION
 READILY AVAILABLE TO ANY  REDEMPTION  CENTER,  REVERSE  VENDING  MACHINE
 SYSTEM  OPERATOR, DEPOSIT INITIATOR-AUTHORIZED CONTRACTED AGENTS, OR ANY
 OTHER APPROPRIATE STAKEHOLDER APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT.
  § 6. Paragraph (b) of subdivision 3 of section 27-1011 of the environ-
 mental  conservation law, as added by section 1 of part PP of chapter 58
 of the laws of 2018, is amended and a new subdivision 4 is added to read
 as follows:
  (b) comply with [minimum post-consumer recycled material content  and]
 hole diameter limitations as defined in rules and regulations promulgat-
 ed  by  the  department  NO  LATER  THAN  APRIL  FIRST,  TWO  THOUSAND
 TWENTY-FIVE, and is recyclable  and  indicates  a  resin  identification
 code.
  4.  EACH  DISTRIBUTOR  IS  REQUIRED  TO MEET THE FOLLOWING PERFORMANCE
 REQUIREMENTS: (A) BEGINNING APRIL FIRST, TWO THOUSAND THIRTY,  AT  LEAST
 TWENTY-FIVE  PERCENT OF ALL BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD BY EACH DISTRIBUTOR
 IN THE STATE SHALL BE REFILLABLE CONTAINERS THAT ARE PART  OF  A  RETURN
 AND  REUSABLE  SYSTEM. EACH DISTRIBUTOR SHALL WORK WITH DEALERS, REVERSE
 VENDING MACHINE OWNERS, AND  REDEMPTION CENTERS TO ENSURE THAT  REFILLA-
 BLE  BEVERAGE  CONTAINERS  SOLD  BY  THE DISTRIBUTOR ACHIEVE AT LEAST AN
 EIGHTY PERCENT RETURN RATE.
  (B) (I) BEGINNING APRIL FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE, ALL DISTRIBU-
 TORS OF NON-REFILLABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SHALL  REPORT  THE  RECYCLING
 RATE, BY MATERIAL TYPE, OF REDEEMED CONTAINERS TO THE DEPARTMENT.
  (II)  BEGINNING APRIL FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-SIX, AT LEAST SEVENTY
 PERCENT OF THE REDEEMED BEVERAGE CONTAINER MATERIAL SHALL BE RECYCLED.
  (III) BEGINNING APRIL  FIRST,  TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY-EIGHT,  AT  LEAST
 EIGHTY  PERCENT  OF  THE  REDEEMED  BEVERAGE CONTAINER MATERIAL SHALL BE
 RECYCLED.
  (IV) BEGINNING APRIL FIRST,  TWO  THOUSAND  THIRTY,  AT  LEAST  NINETY
 PERCENT  OF THE REDEEMED BEVERAGE CONTAINER MATERIAL, INCLUDING BEVERAGE
 CONTAINER CAPS, LIDS, AND OTHER RIGID SEALERS, SHALL BE RECYCLED.
  § 7.  Subdivision  5  of  section  27-1012 of  the  environmental
 conservation law, as amended by section 2 of part JJ of  chapter  58  of
 the laws of 2017, is amended to read as follows:
  5.  All moneys collected or received by the department of taxation and
 finance pursuant to this title shall be deposited to the credit  of  the
 comptroller  with such responsible banks, banking houses or trust compa-
 nies as may be designated by the comptroller.  Such  deposits  shall  be
 kept  separate  and apart from all other moneys in the possession of the
 comptroller. The comptroller shall require adequate  security  from  all
 such depositories. Of the total revenue collected, the comptroller shall
 retain the amount determined by the commissioner of taxation and finance
 to  be  necessary  for refunds out of which the comptroller must pay any
 refunds to which a deposit initiator may be entitled.  OF  THE  REVENUE
 REMAINING  FOLLOWING  PAYMENTS  OF  ANY  REFUNDS,  THE COMPTROLLER SHALL
 RETAIN AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO FIVE PERCENT OF THE TOTAL  FOR  THE  BEVERAGE
 CONTAINER  ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO SECTION 27-1018 OF
 THIS TITLE. After reserving the amount to pay refunds,  the  comptroller
 must, by the tenth day of each month, pay into the state treasury to the
 credit  of the general fund the revenue deposited under this subdivision
 during the preceding calendar month and remaining to  the  comptroller's
 credit on the last day of that preceding month; provided, however, that,
 beginning  April first, two thousand thirteen, nineteen million dollars,
 and all fiscal years thereafter, twenty-three million dollars  plus  all
 funds received from the payments due each fiscal year pursuant to subdi-
 A. 6353--A  9
 
 vision  four  of  this  section  in  excess of the greater of the amount
 received from April first, two thousand  twelve  through  March  thirty-
 first,  two  thousand  thirteen  or  one  hundred twenty-two million two
 hundred  thousand dollars, shall be deposited to the credit of the envi-
 ronmental protection fund established pursuant to  section  ninety-two-s
 of the state finance law.
  §  8.  Paragraph c of subdivision 3 of section 27-1012 of the environ-
 mental conservation law, as added by section 8 of part SS of chapter  59
 of  the  laws  of  2009, is amended and a new subdivision 13 is added to
 read as follows:
  c. all withdrawals from the refund value account during such  quarter,
 including  all  reimbursements  paid pursuant to subdivision two of this
 section, all service charges on the account, PROVIDED THAT SUCH  SERVICE
 CHARGES DO NOT EXCEED THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT AUTHORIZED BY THE COMMISSIONER,
 and all payments made pursuant to subdivision four of this section; and
  13.  ANNUALLY  THE  DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF
 TAXATION AND FINANCE, SHALL USE  AVAILABLE  INFORMATION  TO  PRODUCE  AN
 ANNUAL  REPORT  AT A MINIMUM CONTAINING INFORMATION ON REDEMPTION RATES,
 CONTAINER MATERIAL TYPES BY PERCENT USAGE, REFILLABLE  CONTAINER  USAGE,
 FRAUD  AND  ENFORCEMENT  ACTIONS,  AN  ANALYSIS  OF THE HANDLING FEE AND
 CONSUMER PRICE INDEX, AND INFORMATION  ON  HOW  THIS  PROGRAM  HELPS  TO
 ACHIEVE  THE TARGETS OF CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIX OF THE LAWS OF TWO THOU-
 SAND NINETEEN.  SUCH REPORT SHALL BE SHARED  WITH  THE  LEGISLATURE  AND
 POSTED PUBLICLY ON THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE.
  §  9.  Paragraph a of subdivision 4 of section 27-1012 of the environ-
 mental conservation law, as added by section 8 of part SS of chapter  59
 of the  laws of 2009, is amended to read as follows:
  a.  Quarterly  payments.  An  amount  equal  to  eighty percent of the
 balance outstanding in the refund value account at  the  close  of  each
 quarter shall be paid to the commissioner of taxation and finance at the
 time  the  report  provided  for in subdivision three of this section is
 required to be filed. The  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  may
 require  that  the payments be made electronically. The remaining twenty
 percent of the balance outstanding at the close of each quarter shall be
 the monies of the deposit initiator  and  may  be  withdrawn  from  such
 account  by  the  deposit  initiator.  HOWEVER, A DEPOSIT INITIATOR WHO
 INITIATES DEPOSITS ON REFILLABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS WHICH ARE PART OF A
 RETURN AND REUSABLE SYSTEM MAY BE ENTITLED TO PAY  AN  AMOUNT  EQUAL  TO
 SEVENTY-FIVE  PERCENT  OF  THE  BALANCE  OUTSTANDING IN THE REFUND VALUE
 ACCOUNT SPECIFICALLY ATTRIBUTABLE TO REFILLABLE BEVERAGE  CONTAINERS  AT
 THE CLOSE OF EACH QUARTER TO THE COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION AND FINANCE AT
 THE TIME THE REPORT PROVIDED FOR IN SUBDIVISION THREE OF THIS SECTION IS
 REQUIRED  TO  BE  FILED.  THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROMULGATE RULES ON THE
 ELIGIBILITY OF DEPOSIT INITIATORS FOR SUCH REFILLABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
 BONUS. If the provisions of this section with respect  to  such  account
 have  not  been fully complied with, each deposit initiator shall pay to
 such commissioner at such time, in lieu of the amount described  in  the
 preceding sentence, an amount equal to the balance which would have been
 outstanding  on  such date had such provisions been fully complied with.
 The commissioner of taxation and finance may require that  the  payments
 be made electronically.
  §  10. Paragraph a of subdivision 7 of section 27-1012 of the environ-
 mental conservation law, as amended by section 8 of part SS  of  chapter
 59 of the laws of 2009, is amended to read as follows:
  a. Any person who is a deposit initiator under this title before April
 first, two thousand nine, must apply by June first, two thousand nine to
 A. 6353--A  10
 
 the  commissioner  of taxation and finance for registration as a deposit
 initiator. Any person who becomes a deposit initiator on or after  April
 first,  two thousand nine shall apply for registration prior to collect-
 ing  any deposits as such a deposit initiator. Such application shall be
 in a form prescribed by the commissioner of  taxation  and  finance  and
 shall  require such information deemed to be necessary for proper admin-
 istration of this title. The commissioner of taxation  and  finance  may
 require  that  applications for registration must be submitted electron-
 ically. The commissioner of taxation and  finance  shall  electronically
 issue  a deposit initiator registration certificate in a form prescribed
 by the commissioner of taxation  and  finance  within  fifteen  days  of
 receipt  of  such  application or may take an additional ten days if the
 commissioner of taxation and finance deems it necessary to consult  with
 the  commissioner before issuing such registration certificate. A regis-
 tration certificate issued pursuant to this subdivision  may  be  issued
 for  a  specified term of not less than three years and shall be subject
 to renewal in accordance with procedures specified by  the  commissioner
 of  taxation and finance. The commissioner of taxation and finance shall
 furnish to the commissioner a complete list of registered deposit initi-
 ators and shall continually update such list as warranted.  The  commis-
 sioner shall share any information with the commissioner of taxation and
 finance  that  is  necessary for the administration of this subdivision.
 THE COMMISSIONER SHALL PUBLISH THE LIST OF REGISTERED DEPOSIT INITIATORS
 AND THEIR COVERED PRODUCTS, AND A LIST OF REGISTERED REDEMPTION  CENTERS
 ON THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE.
  §  11.  Section  27-1014  of  the  environmental  conservation law, as
 amended by section 10 of part SS of chapter 59 of the laws of  2009,  is
 amended to read as follows:
 § 27-1014. Authority to promulgate rules and regulations.
  In  addition  to  the  authority  of  the commissioner, under sections
 27-1007, 27-1009 [and], 27-1011, 27-1012, 27-1013, AND 27-1018  of  this
 title,  the  commissioner  shall  have the power to promulgate rules and
 regulations necessary and appropriate for  the  administration  of  this
 title.
  §  12. Section 27-1018 of the environmental conservation law, as added
 by section 13 of part SS of chapter 59 of the laws of 2009,  is  amended
 to read as follows:
 § 27-1018. Beverage container assistance program.
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, WITHIN THE
 AMOUNTS RETAINED BY THE COMPTROLLER FOR USE UNDER THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
 ASSISTANCE  PROGRAM  PURSUANT  TO SUBDIVISION FIVE OF SECTION 27-1012 OF
 THIS  TITLE,  AND  within  the  limits  of  appropriations therefor, the
 commissioner shall make state  assistance  payments  to  municipalities,
 QUALIFYING SMALL businesses, and not-for-profit organizations located in
 the  state,  UPON  APPLICATION, for the cost AND INSTALLATION of reverse
 vending machines located or to be  located  in  the  state.  Such  state
 assistance  payments  shall  not  exceed  fifty  percent of the costs of
 equipment, [and/or the acquisition] INSTALLATION  and/or  rehabilitation
 of  real  property  or  structures located or to be located in the state
 related to the collecting, sorting,  and  packaging  of  empty  beverage
 containers  subject  to the provisions of this title. [Such payments may
 include costs  related  to  the  establishment  of  redemption  centers,
 including  mobile redemption centers.] For the purposes of this section,
 municipalities and not-for-profit organizations shall have  the  meaning
 as  defined in section 54-0101 of this chapter and QUALIFIED SMALL busi-
 nesses shall mean  a  dealer[,  distributor]  or  redemption  center  as
 A. 6353--A  11

 defined in this title that employs less than fifty employees. PREFERENCE
 FOR  THESE FUNDS SHALL BE GIVEN TO REGISTERED REDEMPTION CENTERS THAT DO
 NOT UTILIZE ANY REVERSE VENDING MACHINES.  PREFERENCE  FOR  THESE  FUNDS
 SHALL  ALSO BE GIVEN TO MUNICIPALITIES, NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS, OR
 QUALIFIED SMALL BUSINESSES THAT DO  NOT  HAVE  A  REGISTERED  REDEMPTION
 CENTER WITHIN ONE MILE.
  §  13. Subdivision 1 of section 27-1013 of the environmental conserva-
 tion law, as amended by section 7 of part F of chapter 58 of the laws of
 2013, is amended to read as follows:
  1. The commissioner is hereby empowered to promulgate rules and  regu-
 lations  governing  (a)  the  circumstances in which deposit initiators,
 dealers and distributors, individually or collectively, are required  to
 accept  the  return  of  empty  beverage  containers, including beverage
 containers processed through reverse vending machines and  make  payment
 therefor; (b) the sorting of the containers which a deposit initiator or
 distributor  may  require  of  dealers  and  redemption centers; (c) the
 collection of returned beverage  containers  by  deposit  initiators  or
 distributors, including the party to whom such expense is to be charged,
 the  frequency  of  such  pick ups, A PROCESS FOR SAFE PICK UPS, and the
 payment for refunds and handling fees thereon; (d) the right of  dealers
 to  restrict  or  limit the number of containers redeemed, the rules for
 redemption at the dealers' place of  business,  and  the  redemption  of
 containers  from  a beverage for which sales have been discontinued; (e)
 [to] THE RIGHT OF REDEMPTION CENTERS TO HAVE  TIMELY,  TRANSPARENT,  AND
 SAFE  PICK UPS AND TRANSPARENT VERIFICATION OF CONTAINER COUNTS; (F) THE
 DEPARTMENT SHALL issue registrations to persons, firms  or  corporations
 which  establish redemption centers, subject to applicable provisions of
 local and state laws, at which redeemers and dealers  may  return  empty
 beverage  containers  and  receive  payment  of the refund value of such
 beverage containers[. Such], SUBJECT TO A REVIEW THAT  CONSIDERS  SAFETY
 AND  ACCESSIBILITY,  AND  SHALL  BE RENEWED EVERY TEN YEARS. AS OF APRIL
 FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-SIX, SUCH SUCH registrations shall be  issued
 at  [no  cost] THE COST OF ONE HUNDRED FIFTY DOLLARS. Should the depart-
 ment require [by] ANY ADDITIONAL regulations adopted  pursuant  to  this
 paragraph  [that  redemption  centers  must  obtain  a registration as a
 condition of operation,] any redemption center in business as of  [March
 first, two thousand thirteen] APRIL FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE that
 previously  provided  the  department  with the notification information
 required by regulations in effect as of such date may continue to  oper-
 ate  as  if the department had issued such redemption center a registra-
 tion required by regulations adopted  under  this  paragraph;  provided,
 however,  that  such redemption center shall provide the department with
 any other information required by regulations adopted pursuant  to  this
 paragraph.  The  department  may,  after due notice and opportunity of
 hearing, pursuant to the provisions of section 71-1709 of this  chapter,
 deny  an application or revoke a registration. In determining whether or
 not to revoke a registration the commissioner shall at a  minimum,  take
 into  consideration  the  compliance  history  of a violator, good faith
 efforts of a violator to comply, any economic benefit from noncompliance
 and whether the violation was procedural in nature.  The  commissioner's
 determination  to revoke a registration is subject to review under arti-
 cle seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules; [and (f)] (G) the
 operation of mobile redemption centers in order to ensure  that  to  the
 best extent practicable containers are not proffered for redemption to a
 deposit  initiator  or  distributor outside of the geographic area where
 such deposit initiator sells  containers  and  initiates  deposits;  (H)
 A. 6353--A  12
 
 YEARLY  INFORMATION  PROVIDED TO THE DEPARTMENT FROM DEALERS AND REDEMP-
 TION CENTERS INCLUDING NUMBER  OF  CONTAINERS  REDEEMED  AND  ANY  OTHER
 INFORMATION  REQUIRED  BY  THE  DEPARTMENT;  AND  (I) CLIMATE MITIGATION
 INCLUDING  TARGETS  WITHIN  CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED SIX OF THE LAWS OF TWO
 THOUSAND NINETEEN AND RECOMMENDATIONS ON  IMPROVING  REDEEMED  CONTAINER
 RECYCLING RATES.
  § 14.  Section 27-1005 of the environmental conservation law, as added
 by section 4 of part SS of chapter 59 of the laws of 2009, is amended to
 read as follows:
 § 27-1005. Refund value.
  No  person  shall  sell or offer for sale a beverage container in this
 state unless the deposit on such  beverage  container  is  or  has  been
 collected  by  a  registered deposit initiator and unless such container
 has a refund value of not less than  five  cents,  AND  BEGINNING  APRIL
 FIRST,  TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY-SIX,  A  REFUND VALUE OF NOT LESS THAN TEN
 CENTS, which is clearly indicated thereon as provided in section 27-1011
 of this title.
  § 15.  Section  27-1018  of  the  environmental  conservation  law  is
 REPEALED.
  §  16.  This  act  shall take effect April 1, 2025; provided, however,
 that section one of this act shall take effect April 1, 2026;  provided,
 further,  that  section two of this act shall take effect April 1, 2029;
 provided, further, that the  amendments  to  subdivision  6  of  section
 27-1007  of  the  environmental conservation law made by section four of
 this act shall take effect  immediately;  and  provided,  further,  that
 section  fifteen of this act shall take effect January 1, 2038, with any
 proceeds transferred to the environmental  protection  fund  established
 pursuant  to section 92-s of the state finance law. Effective immediate-
 ly, the addition, amendment and/or repeal  of  any  rule  or  regulation
 necessary  for  the implementation of this act on its effective date are
 authorized to be made and completed on or before such effective date.