# Requires the creation and posting of a food allergy poster in all food service establishments

**Bill ID:** A77
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Linda Rosenthal
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A77 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A77)

## Summary

Requires the creation of a food allergy poster by the department of health; requires the posting of such in all food service establishments; authorizes the department to charge a fee to cover printing, postage and handling expenses of the posters.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  77
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. L. ROSENTHAL, WEPRIN, SEAWRIGHT -- read once and
  referred to the Committee on Consumer Affairs and Protection
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to the  creation  and
  posting of food allergy posters in retail establishments

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The public health law is amended by adding  a  new  section
 1352-f to read as follows:
  ยง  1352-F.  FOOD  ALLERGIES  POSTERS. 1. FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION,
 "FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT" SHALL HAVE THE  MEANING  AS  SUCH  TERM  IS
 DEFINED IN THE STATE SANITARY CODE, EXCEPT THAT IT SHALL NOT INCLUDE ANY
 PUSHCARTS.
  2. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CREATE A POSTER CONTAINING INFORMATION ON FOOD
 ALLERGIES  FOR  USE  IN  FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS IN BOTH ENGLISH AND
 SPANISH.
  3. EVERY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT SHALL POST, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT, IN AN AREA  VISIBLE  TO  ANYONE
 PREPARING OR SERVING FOOD, POSTERS CONTAINING INFORMATION ON FOOD ALLER-
 GIES PROVIDED BY THE DEPARTMENT.
  4.  THE  DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE SUCH POSTERS AVAILABLE AND MAY CHARGE A
 FEE TO COVER PRINTING, POSTAGE AND HANDLING EXPENSES.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition,  amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation  of  this act on its effective date are authorized to be made and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00023-01-3