# Increases penalties relating to the underage use of cannabis

**Bill ID:** A7951
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Keith Brown
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A7951 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A7951)

## Summary

Adds to the penalties for the underage use of cannabis the office of cannabis management contacting the person's parents and/or guardians and such person and their parents and/or guardians attending a cannabis diversion program.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7951
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  August 18, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. K. BROWN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Codes
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the cannabis law, in relation to the underage use of
  cannabis
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Subparagraph  (i)  of  paragraph  (a) of subdivision 4 of
 section 132 of the cannabis law is amended to read as follows:
  (i) The person shall be subject to a civil penalty of  not  more  than
 fifty  dollars.  The  civil  penalty  shall  be payable to the office of
 cannabis management. THE OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT SHALL CONTACT THE
 PARENTS AND/OR GUARDIANS OF SUCH PERSON AND INFORM THEM OF THE  PERSON'S
 VIOLATIONS OF THIS CHAPTER. SUCH PERSON AND THE PARENTS AND/OR GUARDIANS
 OF  SUCH PERSON SHALL BE REQUIRED TO ATTEND A CANNABIS DIVERSION PROGRAM
 ESTABLISHED BY THE OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT TO ASSESS FOR SUBSTANCE
 USE DISORDERS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or
 repeal  of  any  rule  or regulation necessary for the implementation of
 this act on its effective date are authorized to be made  and  completed
 on or before such effective date.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06301-01-3