# Relates to additional days of voting as a result of emergencies

**Bill ID:** A7960
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jo Anne Simon
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A7960 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A7960)

## Summary

Authorizes additional days of voting as a result of emergencies; includes state of emergency.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7960
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  August 18, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. SIMON -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Election Law
 
 AN ACT to amend the election law, in  relation  to  additional  days  of
  voting as a result of emergencies
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. This act shall be known as the "emergency response restora-
 tion of the electoral process act".
  ยง 2. Legislative Declaration. The legislature finds there  is  a  need
 for  an  orderly  process  known in advance to remedy disruptions to the
 electoral calendar created by emergency circumstances. Because the elec-
 toral machinery in a democracy is so important it must not be  disturbed
 or  delayed lightly.  Only the most exigent of circumstances can justify
 resorting to the remedies provided by this act.
  ยง 3. Section 3-108 of the election law,  subdivision  5  as  added  by
 chapter 394 of the laws of 2008, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง  3-108.  Disaster;  additional  day for voting. 1. A county board of
 elections, or the state board of elections with respect to  an  election
 conducted  in  a  district  in  the jurisdiction of more than one county
 board of elections, may determine that, as the direct consequence  of  a
 fire,  earthquake,  tornado,  explosion, power failure, act of sabotage,
 enemy attack or other disaster[, less than twenty-five per centum of the
 registered voters of any city, town or village, or if the  city  of  New
 York,  or any county therein, actually voted in any general election] OR
 STATE OF EMERGENCY, THE ABILITY OF VOTERS TO VOTE HAS  BECOME,  OR  WILL
 IMMINENTLY BECOME, IMPOSSIBLE AND SUCH IMPOSSIBILITY CANNOT BE MITIGATED
 DURING  THE SCHEDULED COURSE OF VOTING. Such a determination by a county
 board of elections shall be subject to approval by the  state  board  of
 elections.  If  the state board of elections makes such a determination,
 it shall notify the [board] BOARDS of elections having jurisdiction  [in
 that county] OVER THAT ELECTION that an additional day of election shall
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04598-01-3
 A. 7960  2
 
 be  held, which notice shall show: the nature of the disaster; the coun-
 ty, city, town or village affected thereby; the number of  persons  duly
 registered to vote therein at such [general] election; and the number of
 persons who voted therein at such [general] election.
  2.  The county board of elections, OR THE STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS, AS
 APPLICABLE, shall thereafter set a date for an additional day for voting
 in the county, city, town or village affected by  the  statement,  which
 shall  not  be  more  than  twenty  days  after the original date of the
 [general] election and shall determine the hours during which the  polls
 shall  remain open on such additional day for voting; provided, however,
 that in any event the polls shall remain open for not less  than  eleven
 hours.  [The]  EACH  county  board of elections HAVING JURISDICTION OVER
 SUCH ELECTION shall [publish notice thereof not less than twice in  each
 week  preceding  the  date for the additional day for voting, in] NOTIFY
 newspapers as designated in this chapter[, and] IN  THE  WEEK  PRECEDING
 THE  DATE OF THE ADDITIONAL DAY OF VOTING. SUCH NOTICE SHALL BE PROVIDED
 TO ALL MEDIA OUTLETS AND COUNTY,  TOWN,  CITY  AND  VILLAGE  CLERKS  AND
 MUNICIPAL  ATTORNEYS  NOT  LESS  THAN ONE WEEK PRECEDING THE DATE OF THE
 ADDITIONAL DAY OF VOTING AND SHALL BE POSTED ON THE BOARD'S  WEBSITE  AS
 SOON  AS POSSIBLE. TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE BOARD shall notify all
 registered voters by mail. Such notice shall also  direct  attention  to
 any change of polling places and shall contain such other and additional
 information as in the judgment of the board of elections shall be neces-
 sary and proper.
  3.  Official ballots shall be provided at public expense at each poll-
 ing place for such additional day of election. In any election  district
 in which voting machines were used upon the original day of voting, they
 shall  be  used  for  the additional day for voting. The [original seal]
 SECURITY SEALS on such machines shall  not  be  removed  nor  shall  the
 machines  be  unlocked  until the opening of the polls on the additional
 day for voting and the board of elections shall provide [an]  additional
 [seal] SECURITY SEALS to be used as soon as the polls are closed on such
 day.
  4.  Only  those persons duly registered to vote upon the original date
 of the [general] election who did not vote on such date shall  be  enti-
 tled  to vote on the additional day for voting. Voting on the additional
 day provided for in this section shall be accomplished solely  by  phys-
 ically  appearing  at  the  polling  place and nothing contained in this
 section shall be construed to extend the time set by law for casting  or
 canvassing  a  SPECIAL,  military,  absentee, SPECIAL FEDERAL or special
 presidential ballot; provided, however, that  nothing  contained  herein
 shall  be  deemed  to invalidate any SPECIAL, MILITARY, absentee, [mili-
 tary] SPECIAL FEDERAL or special presidential ballot  duly  received  on
 the original date of the [general] election.
  5.  (A)  A  county board of elections, or the state board of elections
 with respect to an election conducted in a political subdivision in  the
 jurisdiction  of  more than one county board of elections, may determine
 that, as the direct consequence of a fire, earthquake,  tornado,  explo-
 sion,  power failure, act of sabotage, enemy attack or other disaster OR
 STATE OF EMERGENCY, the ability to make a filing  with  respect  to  any
 provision of this chapter was substantially impaired. Upon making such a
 finding,  a  county  board of elections, or the state board of elections
 shall extend for a reasonable time the period for making such filing. An
 extension GRANTED pursuant to this  subdivision  [granted  by  a  county
 board  of  elections] shall NOT be [subject to the approval of the state
 A. 7960  3

 board of elections if such extension is] longer than [one] TWO  business
 [day] DAYS.
  (B)  A COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS, OR THE STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS WITH
 RESPECT TO AN ELECTION CONDUCTED  IN  A  POLITICAL  SUBDIVISION  IN  THE
 JURISDICTION  OF  MORE THAN ONE COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS, MAY DETERMINE
 THAT, AS THE DIRECT CONSEQUENCE OF A FIRE, EARTHQUAKE,  TORNADO,  EXPLO-
 SION,  POWER FAILURE, ACT OF SABOTAGE, ENEMY ATTACK OR OTHER DISASTER OR
 STATE OF EMERGENCY, THE ABILITY TO CONVENE A PARTY CAUCUS  ON  THE  DATE
 SCHEDULED  FOR SUCH CAUCUS AND MAKE THE REQUIRED FILINGS FOR THE PURPOSE
 OF NOMINATING ONE OR MORE CANDIDATES WAS SUBSTANTIALLY IMPAIRED.  UPON
 MAKING  SUCH  A FINDING, A COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS, OR THE STATE BOARD
 OF ELECTIONS, SHALL POSTPONE FOR A REASONABLE  TIME  THE  DATE  OF  SAID
 PARTY CAUCUS AND REQUIRED FILINGS. AN EXTENSION GRANTED PURSUANT TO THIS
 SUBDIVISION  SHALL  NOT  BE  LONGER  THAN  ONE WEEK FROM THE DATE OF THE
 ORIGINALLY-SCHEDULED PARTY CAUCUS.
  (C) IF AN EXTENSION IS GRANTED PURSUANT TO  THIS  SUBDIVISION  BY  THE
 STATE  BOARD OF ELECTIONS, SUCH BOARD SHALL NOTIFY THE RESPECTIVE COUNTY
 BOARDS OF ELECTIONS OF SUCH  EXTENSION  AND  POST  SUCH  NOTICE  ON  ITS
 WEBSITE.
  (D)  THE  COUNTY  BOARD  OF  ELECTIONS  SHALL IMMEDIATELY NOTIFY MEDIA
 OUTLETS OF THE EXTENSIONS PROVIDED PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION,  POST  SUCH
 NOTICE  TO  ITS WEBSITE AND, TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE FOR THE EXTENSION
 OF A PARTY CAUCUS, POST SUCH NOTICE AT THE LOCATION OF  THE  ORIGINALLY-
 SCHEDULED CAUCUS. THE COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS SHALL ALSO PROVIDE WRIT-
 TEN  NOTICE TO ALL APPROPRIATE COUNTY, TOWN, CITY AND VILLAGE CLERKS AND
 MUNICIPAL ATTORNEYS.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect immediately.