# Requires the commissioner of education to establish a uniform dress code across all public high schools

**Bill ID:** A8038
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Keith Brown
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8038 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8038)

## Summary

Requires the commissioner of education to establish a uniform dress code across all public high schools.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8038
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  September 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. K. BROWN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Education
 
 AN  ACT to amend the education law, in relation to requiring the commis-
  sioner of education establish a uniform dress code across  all  public
  high schools
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 305 of the education law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 60 to read as follows:
  60. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL ESTABLISH A  UNIFORM  DRESS  CODE  FOR  ALL
 PUBLIC  HIGH  SCHOOLS. SUCH UNIFORM DRESS CODE SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE
 LIMITED TO:
  (A) THE LENGTH, COLOR, CUT, STYLE, AND CONDITION OF CLOTHING  A  PUPIL
 IS REQUIRED TO WEAR;
  (B) ANY LOGOS AND/OR DESIGNS REQUIRED TO BE ON THE PUPILS' CLOTHING;
  (C)  IF  ANY LOGOS AND/OR DESIGNS NOT SPECIFIED UNDER PARAGRAPH (B) OF
 THIS SUBDIVISION ARE PERMITTED TO BE ON THE PUPILS' CLOTHING;
  (D) WHEN AND WHERE THE UNIFORM DRESS CODE SHALL BE IN EFFECT; AND
  (E) DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES FOR PUPILS WHO DO  NOT  COMPLY  WITH  SUCH
 UNIFORM DRESS CODE.
  ยง  2.  Section  3604  of  the education law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 8-a to read as follows:
  8-A. NO PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOL WITHIN THE STATE SHALL BE ENTITLED  TO  ANY
 PORTION OF SUCH SCHOOL MONEYS ON SUCH APPORTIONMENT UNLESS THE REPORT OF
 THE  TRUSTEES  OR BOARD OF EDUCATION FOR THE PRECEDING SCHOOL YEAR SHALL
 SHOW THAT THE PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOL IMPLEMENTED AND  ENFORCED  THE  UNIFORM
 DRESS  CODE ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBDIVISION SIXTY OF SECTION THREE HUNDRED
 FIVE OF THIS CHAPTER.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the first of July  next  succeeding
 the  date  on which it shall have become a law and shall apply to school
 years commencing on and after  such  date.  Effective  immediately,  the
 addition,  amendment  and/or  repeal of any rule or regulation necessary
 for the implementation of this act on its effective date are  authorized
 to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13130-01-3