# Directs the department of health to create a prescription drug inventory database

**Bill ID:** A8039
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Phil Steck
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8039 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8039)

## Summary

Directs the department of health to create a prescription drug inventory database that contains a list of all drugs designated as being currently in shortage by the federal food and drug administration's drug shortages database, and a list of pharmacies in the state where each such drug is currently in stock.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8039
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  September 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. STECK -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law,  in  relation  to  directing  the
  department of health to create a prescription drug inventory database
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The public health law is amended by adding  a  new  section
 278-b to read as follows:
  ยง 278-B. PRESCRIPTION DRUG INVENTORY DATABASE. 1. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
 CREATE  AND  MAINTAIN AN ONLINE SEARCHABLE DATABASE THAT CONTAINS A LIST
 OF ALL DRUGS CURRENTLY IN SHORTAGE, AND A  LIST  OF  PHARMACIES  IN  THE
 STATE WHERE EACH SUCH DRUG IS CURRENTLY IN STOCK.
  2.  THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE THE DATABASE ACCESSIBLE ONLY TO LICENSED
 PHYSICIANS AND PHARMACISTS, AND SHALL AUTHORIZE  ONLY  LICENSED  PHARMA-
 CISTS  TO  UPDATE  INVENTORY  LEVELS  OF DRUGS CURRENTLY IN SHORTAGE, AS
 LISTED IN THE DATABASE. EACH PHARMACY SHALL UPDATE ITS INVENTORY  LEVELS
 OF  ALL DRUGS CURRENTLY IN SHORTAGE, AS LISTED IN THE DATABASE, AT LEAST
 WEEKLY.
  3. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL BE AUTHORIZED TO PROMULGATE ANY  RULES  AND/OR
 REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.
  4.  FOR  THE  PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE
 THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  (A) "DATABASE" SHALL MEAN THE DATABASE CREATED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION
 ONE OF THIS SECTION.
  (B) "DRUGS CURRENTLY IN SHORTAGE" SHALL MEAN DRUGS DESIGNATED AS BEING
 CURRENTLY IN SHORTAGE BY THE FEDERAL FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION'S DRUG
 SHORTAGES DATABASE.
  (C) "PHARMACIST" SHALL MEAN A PERSON LICENSED AS A PHARMACIST PURSUANT
 TO ARTICLE ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-SEVEN OF THE EDUCATION LAW.
  (D) "PHARMACY" SHALL MEAN AN ESTABLISHMENT REGISTERED  AS  A  PHARMACY
 PURSUANT TO SECTION SIXTY-EIGHT HUNDRED EIGHT OF THE EDUCATION LAW.
  (E)  "PHYSICIAN"  SHALL MEAN A PERSON LICENSED AS A PHYSICIAN PURSUANT
 TO ARTICLE ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-ONE OF THE EDUCATION LAW.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13193-02-3