# Permits certain schools to provide hemostatic agents for use during emergencies

**Bill ID:** A8062
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michael Durso
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8062 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8062)

## Summary

Permits certain schools to provide hemostatic agents for use during emergencies.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8062
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  September 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. DURSO -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in  relation  to  permitting  certain
  schools to provide hemostatic agents for use during emergencies
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 926 to
 read as follows:
  ยง 926. HEMOSTATIC AGENTS. 1. SCHOOL DISTRICTS, BOARDS  OF  COOPERATIVE
 EDUCATIONAL  SERVICES, COUNTY VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND EXTENSION BOARDS,
 CHARTER SCHOOLS, AND NON-PUBLIC ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN THIS
 STATE MAY PROVIDE AND MAINTAIN  ON-SITE  IN  EACH  INSTRUCTIONAL  SCHOOL
 FACILITY TOPICAL HEMOSTATIC AGENTS IN QUANTITIES AND TYPES DEEMED BY THE
 COMMISSIONER,  IN  CONSULTATION  WITH THE COMMISSIONER OF HEALTH, TO BE
 ADEQUATE TO ENSURE READY AND APPROPRIATE ACCESS FOR USE  DURING EMERGEN-
 CIES TO ANY STUDENT OR STAFF EXPERIENCING EXCESSIVE BLEEDING.
  2. SCHOOL DISTRICTS, BOARDS OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES, COUN-
 TY VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND EXTENSION BOARDS, CHARTER SCHOOLS, AND  NON-
 PUBLIC  ELEMENTARY  AND  SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN THIS STATE, AND ANY PERSON
 EMPLOYED BY ANY SUCH ENTITY OR EMPLOYED BY A CONTRACTOR OF SUCH AN ENTI-
 TY WHILE PERFORMING SERVICES FOR  THE  ENTITY,  MAY  ADMINISTER  TOPICAL
 HEMOSTATIC AGENTS IN THE EVENT OF AN EMERGENCY.
  3. SCHOOL DISTRICTS, BOARDS OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES, COUN-
 TY  VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND EXTENSION BOARDS, CHARTER SCHOOLS, AND NON-
 PUBLIC ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN THIS STATE THAT  ARE  AUTHOR-
 IZED TO PROVIDE AND MAINTAIN EPINEPHRINE AUTO-INJECTORS ON-SITE PURSUANT
 TO  THIS  SECTION  SHALL PROVIDE ALL TEACHERS WITH WRITTEN INFORMATIONAL
 MATERIAL ON THE USE OF TOPICAL HEMOSTATIC AGENTS THAT HAS  BEEN  CREATED
 AND APPROVED BY THE COMMISSIONER OF HEALTH.
  ยง  2.  This act shall take effect on the first of July next succeeding
 the date on which it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the
 addition, amendment and/or repeal of any rule  or  regulation  necessary
 for  the implementation of this act on its effective date are authorized
 to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13275-01-3