# Requires proof of service to include the server's perception of certain characteristics of the person to whom personal service of a summons was delivered

**Bill ID:** A8081BB
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Alex Bores
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [A8081BB PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8081BB)

## Summary

Enacts the stop civil discrimination act requiring proof of service to include the server's perception of certain characteristics of the person to whom personal service of a summons was delivered.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8081--B
  Cal. No. 430
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  September 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. BORES, LEE, BURDICK, SILLITTI, WEPRIN -- read
  once  and  referred  to  the  Committee  on  Judiciary  --  committee
  discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted
  to  said  committee  --  recommitted  to the Committee on Judiciary in
  accordance with Assembly Rule 3, sec. 2 --  reported  from  committee,
  advanced  to a third reading, amended and ordered reprinted, retaining
  its place on the order of third reading
 
 AN ACT to amend the civil practice law and rules, in relation to requir-
  ing proof of service to include the  server's  perception  of  various
  characteristics  of  the recipient in the description of the person to
  whom personal service of a summons was delivered
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Short title. This act shall be known and may be cited as
 the "stop civil discrimination act".
  ยง 2.  Subdivision (b) of rule 306 of the civil practice law and rules,
 as amended by chapter 103 of the laws of 1977, is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  (b)  Personal service. Whenever service is made pursuant to this arti-
 cle by delivery of the summons to an individual, proof of service  shall
 also include, in addition to any other requirement, a description of the
 person to whom it was so delivered, including, but not limited to, [sex,
 color  of skin] THE PROCESS SERVER'S PERCEPTION OF THE PERSON'S: GENDER,
 RACE, hair color, approximate age, approximate weight  and  height,  and
 other identifying features.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13038-04-4