# Relates to residency requirements for village justice of Cayuga Heights

**Bill ID:** A8090
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Anna Kelles
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A8090 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8090)

## Summary

Relates to residency requirements for village justice and/or associate justice of Cayuga Heights; allows the village board of trustees of Cayuga Heights to appoint a person who resides in the county of Tompkins.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8090
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  September 29, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. KELLES -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Local Governments
 
 AN ACT to amend the village law and the public officers law, in relation
  to residency requirements for village justice of Cayuga Heights
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 3-300 of the village law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 34 to read as follows:
  34. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER  OR  OTHER  GENERAL
 LAW, LOCAL LAW, ORDINANCE, OR SPECIAL ACT, THE VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 OF  THE  INCORPORATED  VILLAGE OF CAYUGA HEIGHTS, IN THE COUNTY OF TOMP-
 KINS, MAY, BY RESOLUTION, PROVIDE THAT THE  OFFICE  OF  VILLAGE  JUSTICE
 AND/OR  ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF SUCH VILLAGE MAY BE HELD BY A PERSON WHO IS
 NOT A RESIDENT OF SUCH VILLAGE, PROVIDED THAT SUCH PERSON RESIDES WITHIN
 THE COUNTY OF TOMPKINS.
  ยง 2. Section 3 of the public officers law is amended by adding  a  new
 subdivision 74 to read as follows:
  74.  IN  THE VILLAGE OF CAYUGA HEIGHTS, IN THE COUNTY OF TOMPKINS, THE
 PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION REQUIRING A PERSON TO BE A  RESIDENT  OF  THE
 POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE FOR WHICH HE
 OR SHE SHALL BE CHOSEN OR WITHIN WHICH HIS OR HER OFFICIAL FUNCTIONS ARE
 REQUIRED  TO  BE  EXERCISED, SHALL NOT PREVENT A PERSON FROM HOLDING THE
 OFFICE OF VILLAGE JUSTICE AND/OR ASSOCIATE JUSTICE  OF  THE  VILLAGE  OF
 CAYUGA HEIGHTS, PROVIDED THAT SUCH PERSON RESIDES IN THE COUNTY OF TOMP-
 KINS.  PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THE PERSON PERFORMING THE FUNCTIONS OF VILLAGE
 JUSTICE  IN ANY OTHER VILLAGE SHALL BE A RESIDENT OF SUCH VILLAGE UNLESS
 OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13293-01-3