# Relates to tax billing addresses

**Bill ID:** A8120
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Fred Thiele
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8120 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8120)

## Summary

Provides that local assessor offices no longer must add a code to notification forms for creation of termination of a mortgage escrow account.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8120
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  October 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. THIELE, SAYEGH -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Real Property Taxation
 
 AN ACT to amend the real property tax law, in relation  to  tax  billing
  addresses
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 518 of the real property tax  law,  as  amended  by
 chapter 145 of the laws of 1990, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง  518.  Change in tax billing address.  Where the assessor receives a
 report of a transfer occurring after the  taxable  status  date,  or  is
 otherwise  notified  of  a  change  in tax billing address, the assessor
 shall enter the new tax billing address on the data file, as  that  term
 is  defined in section fifteen hundred eighty-one of this chapter. Where
 no such data file exists, the assessor shall enter the new  tax  billing
 address on the assessment roll. If the assessor does not have custody of
 the assessment roll when such report is received, he or she shall report
 the  new  tax  billing  address  to the person having custody of the tax
 roll, which person shall enter the new tax billing address  on  the  tax
 roll.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize a change
 of the name of the owner included in the data file or appearing  on  the
 roll.  WHERE SUCH "TAX BILLING ADDRESS" IS A MORTGAGE INVESTING INSTITU-
 TION  OR  AGENT  THEREOF,  THE ASSESSOR SHALL NOT BE REQUIRED TO MAKE AN
 ENTRY, PROVIDED THAT THE GOVERNING BODY OF A CITY, VILLAGE, TOWN, SCHOOL
 DISTRICT, FIRE DISTRICT OR COUNTY, AFTER  A  PUBLIC  HEARING,  ADOPTS  A
 LOCAL LAW, ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION PROVIDING THEREFOR.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05797-01-3