# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Sgt Terry James Garigen Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** A8147AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Stephen Hawley
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A8147AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8147AA)

## Summary

Designates a portion of state route 77 between Broadway Road and Sumner Road in the town of Darien, county of Genesee, as the "Sgt Terry James Garigen Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8147--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  October 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. HAWLEY -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Transportation -- recommitted to the Committee on Transportation in
  accordance  with Assembly Rule 3, sec. 2 -- committee discharged, bill
  amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted to said  commit-
  tee

 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the  state  highway  system  as  the "Sgt Terry James Garigen Memorial
  Highway"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-p to
 read as follows:
  ยง  344-P.  PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "SGT TERRY JAMES GARIGEN MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".  ALL  THAT  PORTION  OF  THE
 STATE  HIGHWAY  SYSTEM CONSTITUTING STATE ROUTE 77 BETWEEN BROADWAY ROAD
 AND SUMNER ROAD IN THE TOWN OF  DARIEN,  COUNTY  OF  GENESEE,  SHALL  BE
 DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS THE "SGT TERRY JAMES GARIGEN MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".
  ยง  2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the instal-
 lation and maintenance of adequate signing of the state  highway  system
 as  designated  pursuant  to  section one of this act. However, to avoid
 confusion and to limit any possible disruption of commerce,  the  desig-
 nation  called  for  pursuant to section one of this act shall be one of
 ceremonial nature and the official name of such  highway  shall  not  be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13296-02-4