# Relates to the use of canines trained to detect drugs and firearms during inspections of day care facilities

**Bill ID:** A8165
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Brian Cunningham
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8165 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8165)

## Summary

Requires the use of canines trained to detect drugs and firearms during inspections of day care facilities or premises.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8165
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  October 18, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  CUNNINGHAM  -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Children and Families
 
 AN ACT to amend the social services law, in relation to  inspections  of
  child day care facilities
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Paragraph (a) of subdivision 3 of section 390 of the social
 services law, as amended by section 5 of part H of  chapter  56  of  the
 laws of 2019, is amended to read as follows:
  (a)  The  office of children and family services may make announced or
 unannounced inspections of the records and premises of  any  child  care
 provider,  whether or not such provider has a license from, or is regis-
 tered with, the office of children and family services.  The  office  of
 children  and  family services shall make unannounced inspections of the
 records and premises of any child day care provider within fifteen  days
 after  the  office  of children and family services receives a complaint
 that, if true, would indicate such provider does  not  comply  with  the
 applicable  regulations of the office of children and family services or
 with statutory requirements. If the complaint indicates that  there  may
 be  imminent  danger  to the children, the office of children and family
 services shall investigate the complaint no later than the next  day  of
 operation  of  the  provider. The office of children and family services
 may provide for inspections  through  the  purchase  of  services.  WHEN
 CONDUCTING  INSPECTIONS  PURSUANT TO THIS PARAGRAPH, THE OFFICE OF CHIL-
 DREN AND FAMILY SERVICES, OR A SERVICE CONTRACTED BY SUCH OFFICE,  SHALL
 EMPLOY  THE  USE  OF CANINES SPECIALLY TRAINED TO DETECT THE PRESENCE OF
 DRUGS AND FIREARMS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13410-01-3