# Enacts the "commuter rail employee rights protection act"

**Bill ID:** A8209
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kenneth Zebrowski
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [A8209 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8209)

## Summary

Enacts the "commuter rail employee rights protection act".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8209
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  October 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  ZEBROWSKI  --  read once and referred to the
  Committee on Corporations, Authorities and Commissions
 
 AN ACT concerning protections for employees of the Metro-North  Commuter
  Railroad  company  and the Long Island Rail Road company, wholly owned
  corporations of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority operating as
  common carriers engaged in interstate commerce
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Short  title. This act shall be known and may be cited as
 the "commuter rail employee rights protection act".
  ยง 2. The Metro-North Commuter Railroad company  and  the  Long  Island
 Rail  Road  company and any of their successors and assigns who operate,
 manage, or develop the railroad system within the counties  of  Suffolk,
 Nassau,  Queens,  Kings, New York, Bronx, Westchester, Rockland, Orange,
 Ulster, Putnam, Dutchess, Sullivan, Greene, Columbia, Albany, and  Rens-
 selaer  waive  any  defense  of  jurisdictional or substantive sovereign
 immunity arising out of any state or federal claim or  cause  of  action
 against  it  or its successors and assigns. In addition, the Metro-North
 Commuter Railroad company and the Long Island Rail Road company and  any
 of  their  successors  and  assigns  who operate, manage, or develop any
 municipally owned and operated commuter railroad  operating  within  the
 general  system  of  railroading  within  the state of New York shall be
 subject to the provisions of all federal railroad  laws,  including  the
 "Railway  Labor  Act"  (45 U.S.C. s.151 et seq.), the "Federal Employers
 Liability Act" (45 U.S.C. s.51 et seq.), the "Railroad Retirement Act of
 1937" (45 U.S.C. s. 231 et seq.), the "Railroad Retirement Tax Act"  (26
 U.S.C.  s.  3201  et  seq.), the Federal Railroad Safety Laws (49 U.S.C.
 s.20101 et seq.),  whistleblower  laws,  discrimination  laws,  and  the
 "Interstate  Commerce Act" (49 U.S.C. s.10501 et seq). Such waiver shall
 be retroactive to any lawsuit currently pending in any state or  federal
 court in the state of New York.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11057-01-3