# Prohibits roadside signage for the sale of cannabis

**Bill ID:** A8200
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Scott Gray
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8200 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8200)

## Summary

Prohibits roadside signage for the sale of cannabis or cannabis products on a highway, road, or other vehicular pathway; establishes that a civil penalty of $1,000 shall be assessed for the first offense and a subsequent fine of up to $2,500 for each day that a violation continues.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8200
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  October 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. GRAY -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Economic Development
 
 AN ACT to amend the cannabis law, in relation  to  prohibiting  roadside
  signage for the sale of cannabis
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. This act shall be known and may be cited as  the  "roadside
 cannabis advertising prohibition act".
  ยง  2. The cannabis law is amended by adding a new section 86-a to read
 as follows:
  ยง 86-A. PROHIBITION OF ROADSIDE SIGNAGE FOR THE SALE OF  CANNABIS.  1.
 NO  PERSON, BUSINESS ENTITY, OR GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY SHALL ERECT OR MAIN-
 TAIN ANY SIGN OR BILLBOARD THAT  ADVERTISES  THE  SALE  OF  CANNABIS  OR
 CANNABIS  PRODUCTS,  AS  DEFINED IN THIS ARTICLE, ON A HIGHWAY, ROAD, OR
 OTHER VEHICULAR PATHWAY WITHIN THE STATE.
  2. THIS PROHIBITION SHALL NOT APPLY TO SIGNS OR BILLBOARDS THAT  IDEN-
 TIFY  AN  AUTHORIZED  RETAILER  AND  ARE LOCATED ON THE PREMISES OF THAT
 BUSINESS WHICH IS LEGALLY ALLOWED TO SELL CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS,
 SO LONG AS THE SIGNAGE ONLY IDENTIFIES THE  BUSINESS.  CANNABIS  PRODUCT
 SIGNAGE  SHOULD  ONLY  BE  AFFIXED TO A BUILDING AND NOT READABLE ON THE
 HIGHWAY, ROAD, OR OTHER VEHICULAR PATHWAY.
  3. A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE PUNISHABLE BY A CIVIL  PENALTY
 OF UP TO ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR THE FIRST OFFENSE, AND UP TO TWO THOU-
 SAND  FIVE  HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR EACH SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE. EACH DAY THAT A
 VIOLATION CONTINUES SHALL CONSTITUTE A SEPARATE AND DISTINCT OFFENSE.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the first of January next  succeed-
 ing  the  date  on  which  it shall have become a law and shall apply to
 signs and billboards erected or maintained on or after such date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13415-01-3