# Authorizes the assessor of the town of Babylon to accept an application for exemption from real property taxes from the Phoenix Houses of Long Island, Inc.

**Bill ID:** A8228
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kimberly Jean-Pierre
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8228 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8228)

## Summary

Authorizes the assessor of the town of Babylon to accept an application for exemption from real property taxes from Phoenix Houses of Long Island, Inc.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8228
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  November 6, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A.  JEAN-PIERRE -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Real Property Taxation
 
 AN ACT in relation to authorizing the assessor of the town of Babylon to
  accept an application for exemption from real property taxes from  the
  Phoenix Houses of Long Island, Inc.

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
 the assessor of the town  of  Babylon,  county  of  Suffolk,  is  hereby
 authorized  to  accept  from Phoenix Houses of Long Island, Inc., a not-
 for-profit corporation, an application for exemption from real  property
 taxes  pursuant  to  section  420-a  of  the  real property tax law with
 respect to the 2019 assessment rolls for the parcel owned by such organ-
 ization located in the town of Babylon, located at 20 Washington  Avenue
 in  Deer Park, also known as district 0100, section 090.00, block 02.00,
 lot 086.000. If accepted, the application shall be reviewed as if it had
 been received on or before the taxable status date established for  such
 assessment rolls.
  If satisfied that such corporation would otherwise be entitled to such
 exemption  if such corporation had filed an application for exemption by
 the appropriate taxable status date, the assessor, upon approval of  the
 town  of  Babylon  town board, may grant exemption from taxation on such
 assessment rolls and make the appropriate  corrections  of  the  subject
 rolls.  If exemptions are granted and such corporation, therefore, shall
 have paid any tax with respect to  the  subject  rolls,  the  applicable
 governing  body  or  tax  departments,  in  their sole discretion, shall
 provide for the refund of the taxes paid, along with any fines or penal-
 ties paid, and cancel taxes remaining unpaid.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13343-01-3