# Designates September eleventh as a public holiday

**Bill ID:** A8294
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Charles Fall
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8294 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8294)

## Summary

Designates September eleventh as a public holiday, known as 9/11 Remembrance day.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8294
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  November 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. FALL -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Governmental Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the general construction law, in relation to designating
  September eleventh as a public holiday
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Section 24 of the general construction law, as amended by
 chapter 249 of the laws of 2020, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 24. Public holidays; half-holidays. The term public holiday includes
 the following days in each year: the first day of January, known as  New
 Year's  day;  the  third  Monday  of January, known as Dr. Martin Luther
 King, Jr. day; the twelfth day of February, known as Lincoln's birthday;
 the third Monday in February, known as Washington's birthday;  the  last
 Monday  in  May, known as Memorial day; the second Sunday in June, known
 as Flag day; the nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth; the fourth
 day of July, known as Independence day; the first Monday  in  September,
 known  as Labor day; THE ELEVENTH DAY OF SEPTEMBER, KNOWN AS 9/11 REMEM-
 BRANCE DAY; the second Monday in October, known  as  Columbus  day;  the
 eleventh day of November, known as Veterans' day; the fourth Thursday in
 November,  known as Thanksgiving day; and the twenty-fifth day of Decem-
 ber, known as Christmas day, and if any of such days except Flag day  is
 Sunday, the next day thereafter; each general election day, and each day
 appointed  by  the  president of the United States or by the governor of
 this state as a day of general thanksgiving, general fasting and prayer,
 or other general religious observances. The term  half-holiday  includes
 the  period from noon to midnight of each Saturday which is not a public
 holiday.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13684-01-3