# Relates to limited permits to practice medicine

**Bill ID:** A8382A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Karines Reyes
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8382A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8382A)

## Summary

Provides that limited permits to practice medicine may be renewed biennially; expands the types of facilities where permitees may practice; authorizes permits to be renewed at the discretion of the department of education; provides that such department shall not deny a limited permit based solely on the previous number of authorizations of such permits issued to the applicant.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8382
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  December 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. REYES -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Higher Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation  to  limited  permits  to
  practice medicine
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Subdivisions 2 and 3 of section 6525 of the education  law,
 as  added  by  chapter  987  of the laws of 1971, are amended to read as
 follows:
  2. Limit of practice. A permittee  shall  be  authorized  to  practice
 medicine only under the supervision of a licensed physician and only in:
  (A) a public, voluntary, or proprietary hospital;
  (B)  A  PATIENT  CARE FACILITY OPERATED BY OR FOR ANY FEDERALLY RECOG-
 NIZED AMERICAN INDIAN TRIBE,  THE  INDIAN  HEALTH  SERVICE,  THE  UNITED
 STATES VETERANS' ADMINISTRATION, A PRISON, A SCHOOL, OR A UNIVERSITY;
  (C) A COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTER OR FEDERALLY QUALIFIED HEALTH CENTER; OR
  (D)  A PRIVATE OFFICE OR CLINIC WHERE A SUPERVISING LICENSED PHYSICIAN
 PRACTICES AND THAT IS NOT A PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINIC.
  3. Duration. A limited permit shall be valid for two years AND MAY  BE
 RENEWED  BIENNIALLY.  [It may be renewed biennially at the discretion of
 the department.] NO LIMITATION SHALL BE PLACED ON THE NUMBER OF RENEWALS
 THAT MAY BE ISSUED.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11276-03-3