# Relates to permitting certain claims for compensation based on death due to COVID-19 in memory of Joseph Fletcher

**Bill ID:** A8408AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michael Durso
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [A8408AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8408AA)

## Summary

Enacts the "Joseph Fletcher act"; permits certain claims by essential employees for compensation based on death due to COVID-19 which were previously denied or not timely filed.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8408--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  December 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. DURSO, GRAY, TAGUE, E. BROWN, CHANG, BENDETT,
  ANGELINO, BEEPHAN, JENSEN,  McDONOUGH,  DeSTEFANO  --  read  once  and
  referred  to the Committee on Labor -- recommitted to the Committee on
  Labor in  accordance  with  Assembly  Rule  3,  sec.  2  --  committee
  discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted
  to said committee
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the workers' compensation law, in relation to certain
  claims for death benefits based on death due to COVID-19 in memory  of
  Joseph  Fletcher; and providing for the repeal of such provisions upon
  the expiration thereof
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Short  title. This act shall be known and may be cited as
 the "Joseph Fletcher act".
  ยง 2. The workers' compensation law is amended by adding a new  section
 3-a to read as follows:
  ยง 3-A. REOPENING OF CLAIMS FOR COVID-19 DEATH BENEFITS. 1. A CLAIM FOR
 DEATH  BENEFITS  BASED ON A DIAGNOSIS OF COVID-19 RESULTING IN THE DEATH
 OF THE ESSENTIAL EMPLOYEE WHOSE EXPOSURE WAS SUSTAINED IN SERVICE AS  AN
 ESSENTIAL WORKER AS DEFINED BY EXECUTIVE ORDER 202 ISSUED MARCH SEVENTH,
 TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY AND EXPIRED JUNE TWENTY-FOURTH, TWO THOUSAND TWEN-
 TY-ONE SHALL NOT BE DISALLOWED AS BARRED BY SECTION EIGHTEEN OR  SECTION
 TWENTY-EIGHT  OF  THIS CHAPTER IF SUCH CLAIM IS FILED WITHIN ONE YEAR OF
 THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION. ANY SUBSEQUENT CLAIMS MAY  BE  FILED
 AFTER  SUCH PERIOD IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTIONS EIGHTEEN AND TWENTY-EIGHT
 OF THIS CHAPTER.
  2. THE BOARD SHALL PERMIT THE FILING OF CLAIMS FOR DEATH BENEFITS  DUE
 TO  COVID-19  WHICH  WERE  PREVIOUSLY  DENIED DUE TO SECTION EIGHTEEN OR
 TWENTY-EIGHT OF THIS  CHAPTER  PRIOR  TO  THE  EFFECTIVE  DATE  OF  THIS
 SECTION, AND SHALL, UPON APPLICATION, RE-HEAR AND DETERMINE SUCH CLAIMS.
  ยง  3.  This  act shall take effect immediately and shall expire and be
 deemed repealed two years after such date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11758-05-4