# Relates to adding dwelling occupants to residential dwelling or housing accommodation leases

**Bill ID:** A8422
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Manny De Los Santos
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8422 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8422)

## Summary

Enacts the "fair addition in rental (F.A.I.R) leases act"; authorizes a tenant to add dwelling occupants to residential dwelling or housing accommodation leases upon request of the lease holder; if such occupant is at least 18 years old; and such occupant provides proof of currently residing in such dwelling; prohibits a landlord from increasing the rent or imposing a fee for the purpose of adding occupants to the lease.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8422
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  December 29, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. DE LOS SANTOS -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Housing
 
 AN ACT to amend the  real  property  actions  and  proceedings  law,  in
  relation to adding dwelling occupants to residential dwelling or hous-
  ing accommodation leases
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  Short title. This act shall be known and may be  cited  as
 the "Fair Addition in Rental (F.A.I.R.) Leases Act".
  ยง  2.  The  real  property  actions  and proceedings law is amended by
 adding two new sections 711-a and 711-b to read as follows:
  ยง 711-A. LEASES; ADD DWELLING OCCUPANTS. A LANDLORD IS REQUIRED TO ADD
 OCCUPANTS OF A RESIDENTIAL DWELLING  OR  HOUSING  ACCOMMODATION  TO  THE
 LEASE:
  1. UPON REQUEST BY THE LEASE HOLDER;
  2. IF THE OCCUPANT IS AT LEAST EIGHTEEN YEARS OLD;
  3.  IF THE OCCUPANT CAN SHOW PROOF OF CURRENTLY RESIDING IN SUCH RESI-
 DENTIAL DWELLING OR HOUSING ACCOMMODATION.  SUCH PROOF MAY INCLUDE,  BUT
 NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (A) WATER, ELECTRICITY, GAS, TELEPHONE OR INTERNET BILL;
  (B) CREDIT CARD BILL OR STATEMENT;
  (C) LETTER ISSUED BY A PUBLIC AUTHORITY;
  (D) COMPANY PAYSLIP OR CHECK;
  (E) HOME OR RENTAL INSURANCE POLICY;
  (F) CAR REGISTRATION OR INSURANCE;
  (G) LETTER OF EMPLOYMENT;
  (H)  OFFICIAL  LETTER  FROM  AN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION ON SUCH INSTI-
 TUTION'S LETTERHEAD;
  (I) MUNICIPALITY OR GOVERNMENT TAX LETTER;
  (J) DRIVER'S LICENSE; OR
  (K) RESIDENCE PERMIT.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13754-04-3
 A. 8422  2
 
  ยง 711-B. LANDLORD; PROHIBITION OF RENT INCREASE OR IMPOSITION OF  FEE.
 A  LANDLORD IS PROHIBITED FROM INCREASING THE RENT OR IMPOSING A FEE FOR
 THE PURPOSE OF ADDING OCCUPANTS TO THE LEASE PURSUANT TO  SECTION  SEVEN
 HUNDRED ELEVEN-A OF THIS ARTICLE.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law.