# Creates a live kidney donor follow-up study

**Bill ID:** A8441
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Angelo Santabarbara
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8441 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8441)

## Summary

Creates a ten year live kidney donor follow-up study which includes a one thousand dollars per year stipend for participants; provides two thousand dollars for all kidney donors for health-related expenses.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8441
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  December 29, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. SANTABARBARA -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to  creating  a  live
  kidney  donor  follow-up  study;  and providing for the repeal of such
  provisions upon expiration thereof

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  public health law is amended by adding a new section
 4311 to read as follows:
  ยง 4311. NEW YORK LIVING KIDNEY DONOR FOLLOW-UP STUDY. 1.  THE  DEPART-
 MENT SHALL CONTRACT WITH A QUALIFIED RESEARCH TEAM TO CONDUCT A PROSPEC-
 TIVE STUDY OF LIVING KIDNEY DONOR HEALTH. SUCH STUDY SHALL FOLLOW PEOPLE
 WHO  DONATE  A  KIDNEY  IN  NEW YORK BETWEEN JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND
 TWENTY-FOUR AND DECEMBER THIRTY-FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-EIGHT FOR TEN
 YEARS WHOSE TRANSPLANT SURGERY TAKES PLACE.  ALL  DONORS  WHO  AGREE  TO
 PROVIDE  THEIR  FOLLOW-UP  DATA  FOR  USE  IN  SUCH STUDY WILL RECEIVE A
 STIPEND OF ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR EACH YEAR OF  FOLLOW-UP  THEY  FULLY
 PARTICIPATE  IN. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT INCLUDING RECOM-
 MENDATIONS AND FINDINGS BASED ON THIS STUDY TO THE GOVERNOR, THE  TEMPO-
 RARY PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE, THE SPEAKER OF THE ASSEMBLY AND THE CHAIRS
 OF  THE  SENATE AND ASSEMBLY STANDING COMMITTEES ON HEALTH NO LATER THAN
 DECEMBER THIRTY-FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR AND EACH DECEMBER  THIR-
 TY-FIRST THEREAFTER.
  2. FOR THE FIRST FIVE YEARS POST DONATION, KIDNEY DONORS SHALL EACH BE
 ENTITLED  TO  UP  TO  TWO  THOUSAND  DOLLARS TO PAY COPAYMENTS AND OTHER
 HEALTH-RELATED EXPENSES.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately and shall  expire  and  be
 deemed repealed January 1, 2039.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06899-01-3