# Relates to utilizing schools as polling places

**Bill ID:** A8440
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Carrie Woerner
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8440 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8440)

## Summary

Provides that where practicable, school districts in which schools are utilized as polling places shall schedule conference or professional development days on primary or election days when the polls are open to voters, and if students are present during hours when polls are open, school districts shall take measures to ensure that the general public shall not access other areas of the school outside of the polling place.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8440
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  December 29, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. WOERNER -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to utilizing  schools  as
  polling places
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Paragraph (e) of subdivision 1 of section 414 of the educa-
 tion law, as amended by chapter 257 of the laws of 1976, is  amended  to
 read as follows:
  (e) For polling places for holding primaries and elections and for the
 registration  of voters and for holding political meetings. But no meet-
 ings sponsored by political  organizations  shall  be  permitted  unless
 authorized by a vote of a district meeting, held as provided by law, or,
 in  cities by the board of education thereof. Except in cities, it shall
 be the duty of the trustees or board of  education  to  call  a  special
 meeting for such purpose upon the petition of at least ten per centum of
 the  qualified  electors  of  the  district.  Authority so granted shall
 continue until revoked in like manner and by the same body  as  granted.
 WHERE  PRACTICABLE,  SCHOOL  DISTRICTS  IN WHICH SCHOOLS ARE UTILIZED AS
 POLLING PLACES SHALL SCHEDULE  CONFERENCE OR  PROFESSIONAL  DEVELOPMENT
 DAYS PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION EIGHT OF SECTION THIRTY-SIX HUNDRED FOUR OF
 THIS  CHAPTER  ON  PRIMARY  OR  ELECTION DAYS WHEN THE POLLS ARE OPEN TO
 VOTERS.  IF STUDENTS ARE PRESENT DURING  HOURS  WHEN  POLLS  ARE  OPEN,
 SCHOOL  DISTRICTS  SHALL TAKE MEASURES TO ENSURE THAT THE GENERAL PUBLIC
 SHALL NOT ACCESS OTHER AREAS OF THE SCHOOL OUTSIDE OF THE POLLING PLACE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the first of July  next  succeeding
 the date on which it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13909-01-3