# Requires hotels and lodging facilities to contact guests who leave items behind

**Bill ID:** A8456
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Nader Sayegh
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8456 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8456)

## Summary

Requires hotels and lodging facilities to make at least two attempts to contact guests who leave any item of greater than nominal value or identification documents behind within 48 hours of the completion of their stay and to dispose of the identification documents if the owner cannot be contacted; limits the liability of a lodging owner or operator for damage or loss during shipping.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8456
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  December 29, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. SAYEGH -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Consumer Affairs and Protection
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the general business law, in relation to items left by
  guests of hotels or other lodging facilities
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The general business law is amended by adding a new section
 210 to read as follows:
  ยง 210. ITEMS  LEFT  BY  GUESTS  OF  LODGING  FACILITIES. 1. THE OWNER,
 LESSOR, PROPRIETOR OR MANAGER OF ANY HOTEL,  MOTEL,  STEAMBOAT,  TOURIST
 CABIN,  CAMP,  RESORT, TAVERN, INN, BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE SHALL MAKE
 REASONABLE EFFORTS TO CONTACT A GUEST IF ANY ITEM OF GREATER THAN  NOMI-
 NAL  VALUE, OR IDENTIFICATION  DOCUMENTS, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO A
 DRIVER'S LICENSE, PASSPORT, OR NON-DRIVER IDENTIFICATION CARD, OR COPIES
 OF IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENTS, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO A  COPY  OF  A
 DRIVER'S  LICENSE,  PASSPORT, OR NON-DRIVER IDENTIFICATION CARD ARE LEFT
 BEHIND AFTER THE GUEST'S STAY.
  2. AT LEAST TWO CONTACT ATTEMPTS MUST BE MADE WITHIN FORTY-EIGHT HOURS
 OF THE GUEST COMPLETING THEIR STAY USING THE INFORMATION  USED  TO  BOOK
 THE  STAY.  A  LODGING FACILITY MUST KEEP A RECORD OF THE LOST ITEM OR
 DOCUMENT AND THE STEPS TAKEN TO NOTIFY THE GUEST.
  3. IF CONTACT CANNOT BE MADE, THE OWNER, LESSOR, PROPRIETOR, OR MANAG-
 ER SHALL DISPOSE OF IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENTS AND  COPIES  OF  THE  DOCU-
 MENTS.  DISPOSAL OF IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENTS OR COPIES OF IDENTIFICATION
 DOCUMENTS SHALL INCLUDE THE PHYSICAL DESTRUCTION OF ANY PHYSICAL  COPIES
 SUCH THAT IT WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE TO RECREATE THE COPY.
  4.  A  LODGING FACILITY OWNER OR OPERATOR SHALL NOT BE HELD LIABLE FOR
 ANY LOSS OR DAMAGE TO A GUEST'S LOST ITEM OR DOCUMENT DURING STORAGE  OR
 SHIPPING.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the thirtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10733-02-3