# Provides discounted central business district tolls to individuals residing in transit deserts

**Bill ID:** A8840
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jaime R. Williams
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8840 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8840)

## Summary

Provides a fifty percent discount on all central business district tolls, fees and other charges to individuals residing in transit deserts; requires proof of residency.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8840
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 18, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. WILLIAMS -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Corporations, Authorities and Commissions
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation to providing
  discounted central business district tolls to individuals residing  in
  transit deserts
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 1703 of the vehicle and traffic law is  amended  by
 adding a new subdivision 8-a to read as follows:
  8-A.  "TRANSIT  DESERT"  MEANS  AN AREA LOCATED IN A CITY WITH A POPU-
 LATION OF A MILLION OR MORE THAT LACKS A SUBWAY SYSTEM  AND  IS  HEAVILY
 CAR  DEPENDENT.  SUCH  AREA  SHALL  INCLUDE,  BUT  NOT BE LIMITED TO THE
 FOLLOWING ZIP CODES, SOME OR PART OF, 10301, 10304, 10306, 10307, 10308,
 10309, 10310, 10312, 11234, 11229, 11236, 11357,  11358,  11360,  11361,
 11379,  11411,  11412,  11413, 11422, 11423, 11427, 11428, 11432, 11433,
 11434, 11581, 11691, 11692, 11693, 11694, 11695 AND 11697.
  ยง 2. Section 1704-a of the vehicle  and  traffic  law  is  amended  by
 adding a new subdivision 5 to read as follows:
  5.  THE TRIBOROUGH BRIDGE AND TUNNEL AUTHORITY SHALL IMPLEMENT A FIFTY
 PERCENT DISCOUNT FOR ALL CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT TOLLS, FEES AND OTHER
 CHARGES ASSESSED FOR ALL CARS ENTERING  SUCH  DISTRICT  FROM  A  TRANSIT
 DESERT,  AS  DEFINED IN SUBDIVISION EIGHT-A OF SECTION SEVENTEEN HUNDRED
 THREE OF THIS ARTICLE. SUCH DISCOUNT SHALL NOT APPLY TO COMMERCIAL VEHI-
 CLES OR FOR-HIRE VEHICLES. TO QUALIFY  FOR  SUCH  DISCOUNT,  INDIVIDUALS
 SHALL  BE REQUIRED TO PROVIDE PROOF OF RESIDENCY TO ENSURE SUCH INDIVID-
 UAL RESIDES IN A TRANSIT DESERT. SUCH  DISCOUNT  SHALL  BE  PERIODICALLY
 REVIEWED  NO  LESS  THAN  ANNUALLY  BY  THE TRIBOROUGH BRIDGE AND TUNNEL
 AUTHORITY AND ADJUSTED AS NECESSARY.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or
 repeal  of  any  rule  or regulation necessary for the implementation of
 this act on its effective date are authorized to be made  and  completed
 on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13753-02-3