# Establishing the offense of migrant trafficking

**Bill ID:** A8880
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John Lemondes
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A8880 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8880)

## Summary

Criminalizes the act of engaging in any scheme, plan or pattern to transport an undocumented immigrant from any location outside of New York state to a location within New York state with the intent of dropping such person off in any municipality or federal property located wholly within New York state boundaries or to transport an undocumented immigrant from any location within New York state to another location within New York state with the intent of dropping such person off in any municipality or federal property located wholly within New York state boundaries.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8880
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 26, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. LEMONDES -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Codes
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the penal law, in relation to establishing the offense
  of migrant trafficking
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  This  act  shall  be  known and may be cited as the "stop
 migrant trafficking act".
  ยง 2. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 135.38  to  read
 as follows:
 ยง 135.38 MIGRANT TRAFFICKING.
  1.  A  PERSON IS GUILTY OF MIGRANT TRAFFICKING IF HE OR SHE ENGAGES IN
 ANY SCHEME, PLAN OR PATTERN TO TRANSPORT AN UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANT FROM:
  (A) ANY LOCATION OUTSIDE OF NEW YORK STATE TO A  LOCATION  WITHIN  NEW
 YORK  STATE  WITH  THE INTENT OF DROPPING SUCH PERSON OFF IN ANY MUNICI-
 PALITY OR FEDERAL PROPERTY LOCATED WHOLLY WITHIN NEW YORK STATE  BOUNDA-
 RIES; OR
  (B)  ANY LOCATION WITHIN NEW YORK STATE TO ANOTHER LOCATION WITHIN NEW
 YORK STATE WITH THE INTENT OF DROPPING SUCH PERSON OFF  IN  ANY  MUNICI-
 PALITY  OR FEDERAL PROPERTY LOCATED WHOLLY WITHIN NEW YORK STATE BOUNDA-
 RIES.
  2. AS USED IN THIS SECTION, "PERSON" MEANS A NATURAL PERSON, A  COMPA-
 NY,  SOCIETY, ASSOCIATION, CORPORATION, MANAGER, CONTRACTOR, SUBCONTRAC-
 TOR, PARTNERSHIP, BUREAU,  AGENCY,  SERVICE,  OFFICE  OR  THE  AGENT  OR
 EMPLOYEE OF THE FOREGOING.
  MIGRANT TRAFFICKING IS A CLASS C FELONY.
  ยง  3.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or
 repeal of any rule or regulation necessary  for  the  implementation  of
 this  act  on its effective date are authorized to be made and completed
 on or before such effective date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14039-01-4