# Prohibits residential landlords from charging tenants with fees for the payment of rent through an automated clearing house or online payment system

**Bill ID:** A8967AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Linda Rosenthal
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A8967AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A8967AA)

## Summary

Prohibits residential landlords from charging tenants with fees for the payment of rent through an automated clearing house or online payment system.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8967--A
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  January 31, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. L. ROSENTHAL -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Housing -- committee discharged,  bill  amended,  ordered
  reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN  ACT to amend the real property law, in relation to prohibiting resi-
  dential landlords from charging tenants with fees for the  payment  of
  rent through an automated clearing house or online payment system
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 235-g of the real property law, as added by chapter
 367 of the laws of 2010, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 235-g. Electronic billing and/or payment  of  rent.  1.  A  landlord
 shall not require a lessee or tenant to use an electronic billing and/or
 payment  system  as  the only method for the payment of rent. A landlord
 shall not assess any fee or other charge for a  lessee  or  tenant  that
 chooses not to use an electronic billing and/or payment system.
  2.  A LANDLORD SHALL NOT ASSESS ANY FEE OR OTHER CHARGE FOR THE USE OF
 AN AUTOMATED CLEARING HOUSE PAYMENT FOR THE PAYMENT OF RENT.
  3. A LANDLORD SHALL PROVIDE A  LESSEE  OR  TENANT  A  METHOD  FOR  THE
 PAYMENT  OF  RENT  THAT DOES NOT INCUR A FEE OR OTHER CHARGE ASSESSED BY
 THE LANDLORD. THIS METHOD MAY INCLUDE BUT IS  NOT  LIMITED  TO  CASH  OR
 PERSONAL CHECK OF THE LESSEE OR TENANT.
  4.  Any agreement by a lessee or tenant of a dwelling waiving or modi-
 fying [his or her] THEIR rights as set forth in this  section  shall  be
 void as contrary to public policy.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14021-02-4