# Provides for a disability benefit for employees of the New York city transit authority who are disabled by reason of an assault sustained in the course of employment

**Bill ID:** A9004
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Yudelka Tapia
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9004 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9004)

## Summary

Provides for a disability benefit for employees of the New York city transit authority, and its subsidiary corporations, who are disabled by reason of an assault sustained in the course of employment.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9004
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 1, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. TAPIA -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Corporations, Authorities and Commissions
 
 AN ACT to amend the public authorities law, in relation to  providing  a
  disability benefit for employees of the New York city transit authori-
  ty  and  its  subsidiary corporations who are disabled by reason of an
  assault sustained in the course of employment

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  public  authorities  law  is amended by adding a new
 section 1210-b to read as follows:
  ยง 1210-B. DISABILITY BENEFIT FOR  EMPLOYEES.  1.  AS  USED  IN  THIS
 SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  A.  "AUTHORITY" SHALL MEAN THE NEW YORK CITY TRANSIT AUTHORITY AND ANY
 OF ITS  SUBSIDIARY  CORPORATIONS,  INCLUDING  THE  MANHATTAN  AND  BRONX
 SURFACE OPERATING AUTHORITY.
  B. "EMPLOYEE" SHALL MEAN ANY OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE OF THE AUTHORITY.
  2. ANY EMPLOYEE OF THE AUTHORITY WHO, AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS
 SECTION,  SUSTAINS  AN  INJURY  FOR  WHICH HE OR SHE IS DETERMINED TO BE
 ELIGIBLE FOR WORKERS' COMPENSATION BENEFITS AS A RESULT  OF  AN  ASSAULT
 SUSTAINED  IN  THE COURSE OF HIS OR HER EMPLOYMENT SHALL BE ENTITLED, IN
 ADDITION TO ANY WORKERS' COMPENSATION  PAYMENT  AND  ANY  OTHER  BENEFIT
 RECEIVED  BY  THE  EMPLOYEE OWING TO SUCH DISABILITY WHETHER PURSUANT TO
 LAW OR CONTRACT, TO A DISABILITY BENEFIT PAYMENT EQUAL  TO  ONE-HALF  OF
 THE WEEKLY WORKERS' COMPENSATION PAYMENT, EXCLUDING SCHEDULE AWARDS THAT
 THE  EMPLOYEE  RECEIVES FOR THE SAME DISABILITY. SUCH DISABILITY PAYMENT
 SHALL BE MADE BY THE AUTHORITY BI-WEEKLY AND SHALL CONTINUE FOR SO  LONG
 AS  THE  EMPLOYEE  RECEIVES A WORKERS' COMPENSATION PAYMENT FOR THE SAME
 DISABILITY. THE BENEFITS PROVIDED FOR  IN  THIS  SECTION  SHALL  NOT  BE
 DEEMED  TO  OFFSET  OR REDUCE ANY OTHER PAYMENT TO WHICH THE EMPLOYEE IS
 OTHERWISE ENTITLED.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02336-01-3