# Requires schools to include instruction on the prevention of co-occurring disorders as an integral part of their health education programs

**Bill ID:** A9050
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Keith Brown
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9050 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9050)

## Summary

Requires schools to include instruction on the prevention of co-occurring disorders as an integral part of their health education programs.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9050
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 5, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. K. BROWN, BENDETT -- read once and referred to
  the Committee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to requiring  schools  to
  include  prevention  of  co-occurring disorders as an integral part of
  their health education programs
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The section heading of section 804 of the education law, as
 amended  by chapter 390 of the laws of 2016, is amended and a new subdi-
 vision 2-a is added to read as follows:
  Health education regarding  mental  health,  alcohol,  drugs,  tobacco
 abuse,  CO-OCCURRING  DISORDERS  and  the  prevention  and  detection of
 certain cancers.
  2-A. (A) ALL SCHOOLS SHALL INCLUDE, AS  AN  INTEGRAL  PART  OF  HEALTH
 EDUCATION, INSTRUCTION ON THE PREVENTION OF CO-OCCURRING DISORDERS, SUCH
 AS MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES AND THE MISUSE AND ABUSE OF ALCOHOL, TOBACCO AND
 OTHER DRUGS.
  (B)  SUCH  INSTRUCTION  SHALL  BE  DESIGNED ACCORDING TO THE NEEDS AND
 ABILITIES OF THE PUPILS AT SUCCESSIVE GRADE LEVELS WITH THE  PURPOSE  OF
 EDUCATING  ABOUT  THE  IMPORTANCE OF MAINTAINING MENTAL HEALTH AND WELL-
 NESS, FOSTERING AND DEVELOPING HEALTHY DECISION MAKING THROUGH AN UNDER-
 STANDING OF PATHWAYS TO SUBSTANCE MISUSE/ADDICTION AND PREPARING  PUPILS
 TO  LIVE HEALTHY LIVES. IN DEVELOPING SUCH INSTRUCTION, THE COMMISSIONER
 MAY CONSULT WITH THE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON  UNDERAGE  ALCOHOL  CONSUMPTION
 AND  YOUTH SUBSTANCE ABUSE, ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO SECTION 19.06 OF THE
 MENTAL HYGIENE LAW,  AND  THE  ADOLESCENT  SUICIDE  PREVENTION  PROGRAM,
 ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO SECTION 41.49 OF THE MENTAL HYGIENE LAW.
  ยง  2.  This act shall take effect on the first of July next succeeding
 the date on which it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the
 addition, amendment and/or repeal of any rule  or  regulation  necessary
 for  the implementation of this act on its effective date are authorized
 to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13769-02-3