# Renames the state board of parole

**Bill ID:** A9097
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michaelle C. Solages
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9097 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9097)

## Summary

Renames the state board of parole the state board of re-entry; makes conforming changes.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9097
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 7, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. SOLAGES -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Correction
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law, in relation  to  renaming  the  state
  board  of parole; and to amend the correction law, the criminal proce-
  dure law, the judiciary law, the mental hygiene law, the public health
  law and the penal law, in relation to making conforming changes

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The article heading of article 12-B of the executive law,
 as amended by section 105 of subpart B of part C of chapter  62  of  the
 laws of 2011, is amended to read as follows:
  STATE BOARD OF [PAROLE] RE-ENTRY
  §  2.  Paragraphs (c) and (e) of subdivision 1 of section 169 of the
 executive law, paragraph (c) as amended by section 9 of part A of  chap-
 ter  60  of the laws of 2012 and paragraph (e) as amended by section 2-a
 of part AA of chapter 56 of the laws of 2019, are  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  (c)  commissioner of agriculture and markets, commissioner of alcohol-
 ism and substance abuse services,  adjutant  general,  commissioner  and
 president  of  state  civil service commission, commissioner of economic
 development, chair of the energy  research  and  development  authority,
 president  of  higher  education  services  corporation, commissioner of
 motor vehicles, member-chair of board of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY,  chair  of
 public  employment  relations board, secretary of state, commissioner of
 alcoholism and substance abuse services, executive director of the hous-
 ing finance agency, commissioner of housing and community renewal, exec-
 utive director of state  insurance  fund,  commissioner-chair  of  state
 liquor authority, and chair of the workers' compensation board;
  (e)  chairperson  of state athletic commission, director of the office
 of victim services, chairperson of human  rights  appeal  board,  chair-
 person  of  the  industrial  board  of appeals, chairperson of the state
 commission of correction, members of the  board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY,
 member-chairperson  of  unemployment insurance appeal board, director of
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13619-01-3
 A. 9097  2
 
 veterans' services, and vice-chairperson of  the  workers'  compensation
 board;
  §  3.  Section 244 of the executive law, as amended by section 19 of
 part A of chapter 56 of the laws of 2010, is amended to read as follows:
  § 244. Hostels and foster homes. 1. The office is hereby authorized to
 provide or to pay for care in a hostel or foster home  approved  by  the
 office  as  suitable for such cases for any probationer or parolee under
 the age of twenty-one years when the [parole] board  OF  RE-ENTRY  or  a
 judge  of  a  court  determines that there is no other suitable home for
 such probationer or parolee and that such probationer or parolee  should
 be placed in such hostel or foster home. In addition to payment for such
 care,  when  ordered  by the board or court, the office is authorized to
 provide or pay for clothing and other necessities, including medical and
 psychiatric treatment, required for the welfare of such  probationer  or
 parolee.  The  office  may also provide or contract for such care in any
 suitable facility operated by a department of correction or by any other
 public or voluntary social welfare agency, institution or  organization.
 A  court  with  respect  to such a probationer and the [parole] board OF
 RE-ENTRY with respect to such a parolee shall, subject to regulation  by
 the  division control admissions to and discharges from such hostels and
 foster homes.  When placement is made in any hostel or foster  home,  or
 in any facility other than a public institution, such placement whenever
 practicable shall be in a hostel, or facility operated by or in the home
 of a person or persons of the same religious faith as the probationer or
 parolee.
  2.  The office shall have authority and the duty to stimulate programs
 for the development of hostels and foster homes for the care  of  proba-
 tioners and parolees under the age of twenty-one years.
  §  4.  Subdivision 1 of section 259 of the executive law, as added by
 section 37 of subpart A of  part C of chapter 62 of the laws of 2011, is
 amended and a new subdivision 9 is added to read as follows:
  1. "Board" means the state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY.
  9. "DIVISION" MEANS THE DIVISION OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE SERVICES.
  § 5.  Section 259-a of the executive law, as added by  section  38  of
 subpart  A  of  part C of chapter 62 of the laws of 2011, is amended to
 read as follows:
  § 259-a. State board of [parole] RE-ENTRY; funding. The annual  budget
 submitted  by the governor shall separately state the recommended appro-
 priations for the state board of [parole]  RE-ENTRY.  Upon  enactment,
 these  separately  stated appropriations for the state board of [parole]
 RE-ENTRY shall not be decreased by interchange with any other  appropri-
 ation, notwithstanding section fifty-one of the state finance law.
  § 6.  The section heading and subdivisions 1 and 3 of section 259-b of
 the  executive  law, the section heading and subdivision 1 as amended by
 section 38-a of subpart A of  part C of chapter 62 of the laws  of  2011
 and  subdivision  3  as  amended by chapter 135 of the laws of 2013, are
 amended to read as follows:
  State board of [parole] RE-ENTRY; organization. 1. There shall  be  in
 the  department  a  state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY which shall possess
 the powers and duties hereinafter specified. The  board  shall  function
 independently  of  the  department  regarding all of its decision-making
 functions, as well as any other powers  and  duties  specified  in  this
 article,  provided,  however,  that  administrative  matters  of general
 applicability within the department shall be applicable  to  the  board.
 Such  board shall consist of not more than nineteen members appointed by
 the governor with the advice and consent of  the  senate.  The  term  of
 A. 9097  3
 
 office  of  each  member of such board shall be for six years; provided,
 however, that any member chosen to fill a  vacancy  occurring  otherwise
 than  by  expiration of term shall be appointed for the remainder of the
 unexpired  term of the member whom he OR SHE is to succeed. In the event
 of the inability to act of any member, the  governor  may  appoint  some
 competent  informed person to act in his OR HER stead during the contin-
 uance of such disability.
  3. The governor shall designate one of the members  of  the  board  as
 [chairman]  CHAIRPERSON to serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the
 governor or until the member's term of office expires and a successor is
 designated in accordance with law, whichever first occurs.  The  [chair-
 man]  CHAIRPERSON  shall be responsible for the administrative functions
 and daily operations of the [parole] board  and  its  staff,  except  as
 otherwise provided by law.
  § 7. The section heading, the opening paragraph and subdivisions 4, 12
 and  13  of  section 259-c of the executive law, the section heading and
 the opening paragraph as amended by section 38-b of subpart A of  part C
 of chapter 62 of the laws of 2011, subdivisions 4 and 12 as  amended  by
 chapter 322 of the laws of 2021 and subdivision 13 as amended by chapter
 292 of the laws of 2018, are amended to read as follows:
  State  board  of [parole] RE-ENTRY; functions, powers and duties.  The
 state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall:
  4. establish written procedures for its use in making parole decisions
 as required by law. Such written procedures shall incorporate  risk  and
 needs  principles  to  measure  the  rehabilitation of persons appearing
 before the board,  the  likelihood  of  success  of  such  persons  upon
 release,  and  assist members of the state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY in
 determining which incarcerated individuals may  be  released  to  parole
 supervision;
  12.  to  facilitate  the  supervision  of all incarcerated individuals
 released on community supervision  the  [chairman]  CHAIRPERSON  of  the
 state  board of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall consider the implementation of a
 program of graduated sanctions, including but not limited to the  utili-
 zation  of a risk and needs assessment instrument that would be adminis-
 tered to all incarcerated individuals eligible for  parole  supervision.
 Such  a  program  would  include various components including the use of
 alternatives to incarceration for technical parole violations;
  13. transmit a report of the work  of  the  state  board  of  [parole]
 RE-ENTRY  for the preceding calendar year to the governor and the legis-
 lature annually.  Such report  shall  include  statistical  information
 regarding the demographics of persons granted release and considered for
 release  to  community  supervision  or  deportation,  including but not
 limited to age, gender, race, ethnicity, region of commitment and  other
 relevant categories of classification and commitment;
  §  8.  Subdivision 1 of section 259-d of the executive law, as amended
 by section 38-b-2 of subpart A of part C of chapter 62 of  the  laws  of
 2011, is amended to read as follows:
  1.  The  state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall appoint and shall have
 the power to remove, in accordance with  the  provisions  of  the  civil
 service  law, hearing officers who shall be authorized to conduct parole
 revocation proceedings. Hearing officers shall function independently of
 the department regarding all of  their  decision-making  functions,  and
 shall  report directly to the board, provided, however, that administra-
 tive matters of general applicability within  the  department  shall  be
 applicable  to  all  hearing officers. A hearing officer conducting such
 proceedings shall, when delegated such authority by the board  in  rules
 A. 9097  4
 
 adopted  by the board, be required to make a written decision in accord-
 ance with standards and rules adopted by  the  board.  Nothing  in  this
 article  shall  be  deemed  to  preclude  a member of the state board of
 [parole]  RE-ENTRY  from  exercising  all  of  the functions, powers and
 duties of a hearing officer upon request of the [chairman] CHAIRPERSON.
  § 9. Section 259-e of the executive law, as amended by chapter 322  of
 the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  §  259-e.  Institutional parole services. The department shall provide
 institutional parole services. Such services shall  include  preparation
 of reports and other data required by the state board of [parole] RE-EN-
 TRY in the exercise of its functions with respect to release on presump-
 tive release, parole, conditional release or post-release supervision of
 incarcerated  individuals.  Additionally, the department shall determine
 which incarcerated individuals are in need of a deaf language interpret-
 er or an English language interpreter, and shall  inform  the  board  of
 such  need  within  a reasonable period of time prior to an incarcerated
 individual's scheduled appearance before the board.  Employees  of  the
 department  who  collect  data,  interview  incarcerated individuals and
 prepare reports for the state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY in institutions
 under the jurisdiction of the department shall  work  under  the  direct
 supervision  of  the  deputy commissioner of the department in charge of
 program services. Data and reports submitted to the board shall  address
 the  statutory  factors  to  be  considered by the board pursuant to the
 relevant provisions of section two hundred fifty-nine-i of this article.
  § 10. Subdivision 5 of section 259-h of the executive law, as  amended
 by chapter 322 of the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  5.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed as diminish-
 ing the discretionary authority of the board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY  to
 determine whether or not an incarcerated individual is to be paroled.
  §  11. Subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (f) of subdivision 3, paragraph
 (b) of subdivision 6 and subdivision 8 of section 259-i of the executive
 law, subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (f) of subdivision 3 as amended  by
 chapter  427  of  the  laws of 2021, paragraph (b) of subdivision 6 as
 added by section 1 of part T of chapter 62  of  the  laws  of  2003  and
 subdivision  8  as amended by chapter 9 of the laws of 2017, are amended
 to read as follows:
  (iii) Both the alleged violator and an attorney who has filed a notice
 of appearance on his or her behalf in accordance with the rules  of  the
 board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY shall be given written notice of the date,
 place and time of the hearing pursuant to subparagraph (ix) of paragraph
 (c) of this subdivision.
  (b) The [chairman] CHAIRPERSON of the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall
 maintain records of all parole interviews and hearings for a  period  of
 twenty-five years from the date of the parole release interview or until
 expiration of the maximum term of sentence.
  8.  Foreign born or non-English speaking person before the board. Upon
 notification from the department pursuant to section two hundred  fifty-
 nine-e  of this article, or upon the request of any foreign born or non-
 English speaking person who is scheduled to participate in an interview,
 parole release hearing, preliminary hearing or revocation hearing, there
 shall be appointed from the New York state office  of  general  services
 statewide  administrative  services contract, a qualified interpreter to
 interpret the proceedings to and the statements  or  testimony  of  such
 person.  The  board shall determine a reasonable fee for all such inter-
 preting services, the cost of which shall be a charge upon the board  of
 A. 9097  5
 
 [parole] RE-ENTRY. No such request or appointment shall cause a delay of
 release from incarceration of such person.
  §  12.  Subdivisions 1, 2 and 3 of section 259-j of the executive law,
 as amended by section 38-g of subpart A of part C of chapter 62  of  the
 laws of 2011, are amended to read as follows:
  1.  Except where a determinate sentence was imposed for a felony other
 than a felony defined in article two  hundred  twenty  [or  article  two
 hundred  twenty-one] of the penal law, if the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY
 is satisfied  that  an  absolute  discharge  from  presumptive  release,
 parole,  conditional  release  or  release  to  a period of post-release
 supervision is in the best interests of society,  the  board  may  grant
 such  a  discharge  prior  to the expiration of the full term or maximum
 term to any person who has been on unrevoked community  supervision  for
 at least three consecutive years. A discharge granted under this section
 shall  constitute a termination of the sentence with respect to which it
 was granted. No such discharge shall be  granted  unless  the  board  is
 satisfied  that  the  parolee or releasee, otherwise financially able to
 comply with an order of restitution and the  payment  of  any  mandatory
 surcharge,  sex offender registration fee or DNA databank fee previously
 imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction,  has  made  a  good  faith
 effort to comply therewith.
  2.  The [chairman] CHAIRPERSON of the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall
 promulgate rules and regulations governing the  issuance  of  discharges
 from  community supervision pursuant to this section to assure that such
 discharges are consistent with public safety.
  3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the  contra-
 ry, where a term of post-release supervision in excess of five years has
 been  imposed  on  a  person convicted of a crime defined in article one
 hundred thirty of the penal law, including a sexually motivated  felony,
 the  board  of [parole] RE-ENTRY may grant a discharge from post-release
 supervision prior to the expiration of the maximum term of  post-release
 supervision.  Such a discharge may be granted only after the person has
 served at least five years of post-release supervision, and  only  to  a
 person  who  has been on unrevoked post-release supervision for at least
 three consecutive years. No such discharge shall be granted  unless  the
 board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY  or  the department acting pursuant to its
 responsibility under subdivision one of section two hundred one  of  the
 correction  law  consults  with  any  licensed  psychologist,  qualified
 psychiatrist, or other mental health professional who is providing  care
 or  treatment  to  the  supervisee; and the board: (a) determines that a
 discharge from post-release supervision is  in  the  best  interests  of
 society; and (b) is satisfied that the supervisee, otherwise financially
 able  to  comply  with  an  order  of restitution and the payment of any
 mandatory surcharge, sex offender registration fee, or DNA data bank fee
 previously imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction, has made a good
 faith effort to comply  therewith.  Before  making  a  determination  to
 discharge  a person from a period of post-release supervision, the board
 of [parole] RE-ENTRY may request that the commissioner of the office  of
 mental  health  arrange  a  psychiatric  evaluation of the supervisee. A
 discharge granted under this section shall constitute a  termination  of
 the sentence with respect to which it was granted.
  §  13.  Subdivisions 1, 2 and 4 of section 259-k of the executive law,
 as amended by section 38-i of subpart A of part C of chapter 62  of  the
 laws of 2011, are amended to read as follows:
  1. All case files shall be maintained by the department for use by the
 department  and  board. The department and board and authorized officers
 A. 9097  6
 
 and employees thereof shall have complete access to such files  and  the
 board  of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall have the right to make such entries as
 the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall deem appropriate in accordance with
 law.
  2.  The  board  shall  make  rules  for the purpose of maintaining the
 confidentiality of records, information contained therein  and  informa-
 tion  obtained in an official capacity by officers, employees or members
 of the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY.
  4. Upon a determination by the department and board of [parole] RE-EN-
 TRY that records regarding an individual presently under the supervision
 of the department are relevant to an investigation  of  child  abuse  or
 maltreatment  conducted  by a child protective service pursuant to title
 six of article six of the social services law, the department and  board
 shall provide the records determined to be relevant to the child protec-
 tive  service  conducting  the  investigation.  The department and board
 shall promulgate rules for the transmission of records  required  to  be
 provided under this section.
  §  14.  Subdivisions  1 and 2 of section 259-l of the executive law,
 subdivision 1 as amended by chapter 322 of the laws of 2021 and subdivi-
 sion 2 as amended by section 38-j of subpart A of part C of  chapter  62
 of the laws of 2011, are amended to read as follows:
  1.  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of corrections and commu-
 nity supervision to ensure  that  all  officers  and  employees  of  the
 department  shall  at  all  times  cooperate  with the board of [parole]
 RE-ENTRY and shall furnish to such members of the board and employees of
 the board such information as may  be  appropriate  to  enable  them  to
 perform  their  independent decision making functions. It is also his or
 her duty to ensure that the functions of the board of [parole]  RE-ENTRY
 are not hampered in any way, including but not limited to: a restriction
 of  resources including staff assistance; limited access to vital infor-
 mation; and presentation of an incarcerated individual's information  in
 a  manner  that  may inappropriately influence the board in its decision
 making. Where an incarcerated individual has appeared before  the  board
 prior  to  having  completed any program assigned by the department, and
 such program remains incomplete by no fault of the incarcerated individ-
 ual, and where the board has denied such incarcerated individual release
 pursuant to paragraph (a) of subdivision  two  of  section  two  hundred
 fifty-nine-i  of  this  article, the department shall prioritize such an
 incarcerated individual's placement into the assigned program.
  2. The official in charge of each institution wherein  any  person  is
 confined  under  a  definite  sentence of imprisonment, all officers and
 employees thereof and all other public  officials  shall  at  all  times
 cooperate with the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY, and shall furnish to such
 board, its officers and employees such information as may be required by
 the  board to perform its functions hereunder. The members of the board,
 its officers and employees shall at all times be given  free  access  to
 all  persons  confined  in  any such institution under such sentence and
 shall be furnished with appropriate working space  in  such  institution
 for such purpose without charge therefor.
  § 15. Subdivision 2 of section 259-m of the executive law, as added by
 chapter 904 of the laws of 1977, is amended to read as follows:
  2.  The [chairman] CHAIRPERSON of the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall
 have power and shall be charged with the duty of promulgating such rules
 and regulations as may be deemed necessary to carry out the terms  of  a
 compact entered into by the state pursuant to this section.
 A. 9097  7
 
  §  16. Subdivision 3 of section 259-o of the executive law, as amended
 by chapter 211 of the laws of 1985, is amended to read as follows:
  3.  Whenever  there  is  reasonable  cause  to  believe  that a person
 released on parole in this state but under  the  parole  supervision  of
 another state pursuant to section two hundred fifty-nine-m of this arti-
 cle  has  violated the conditions thereof, any person duly authorized in
 such other state to conduct preliminary violation hearings, upon request
 of the [chairman] CHAIRPERSON of the board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY,  may
 conduct such hearing, unless such hearing is waived by the parolee.  The
 preliminary  violation hearing and the determinations made thereat shall
 have  the  same  force  and  effect  as  preliminary  violation  hearing
 conducted  in  this state by the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY or a member,
 hearing officer or panel thereof.
  § 17. Subdivisions 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 of section 259-q of the  executive
 law,  subdivisions  1,  2  and  6  and paragraph (b) of subdivision 4 as
 amended by section 38-k-1 of subpart A of part C of chapter  62  of  the
 laws  of  2011,  subdivision  3 as amended by chapter 120 of the laws of
 2017, and subdivision 4 as added by chapter 466 of the laws of 1978, are
 amended to read as follows:
  1. No civil action shall be brought in any court of the state,  except
 by  the  attorney general on behalf of the state, against any officer or
 employee of the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY or former division of parole,
 in his OR HER personal capacity, for damages arising out of any act done
 or the failure to perform any act within the scope of the employment and
 in the discharge of the duties by such officer or employee.
  2. Any claim for damages arising out of any act done or the failure to
 perform any act within the scope of the employment and in the  discharge
 of the duties of any officer or employee of the board of [parole] RE-EN-
 TRY  or former division of parole shall be brought and maintained in the
 court of claims as a claim against the state.
  3. The state shall save harmless and indemnify any officer or employee
 of the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY or  former  division  of  parole  from
 financial  loss  resulting  from  a claim filed in a court of the United
 States for damages arising out of an act done or the failure to  perform
 any  act  that  was  (a)  within  the scope of the employment and in the
 discharge of the duties of such officer or employee, and (b) not done or
 omitted with the intent to violate any rule or regulation of the depart-
 ment, board or former division or of any statute or governing  case  law
 of  the  state  or  of  the  United  States at the time the damages were
 sustained; provided that the officer or employee shall comply  with  the
 provisions  of subdivision four of section seventeen of the public offi-
 cers law.
  4. (a) The provisions of this section shall supplement, and be  avail-
 able  in  addition to, the provisions of section seventeen of the public
 officers law and, insofar as this section is inconsistent  with  section
 seventeen  of  the  public  officers law, the provisions of this section
 shall be controlling.
  (b) The provisions of this section shall not be construed in  any  way
 to  impair,  modify or abrogate any immunity available to any officer or
 employee of the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY or former division of  parole
 under the statutory or decisional law of the state or the United States.
  6.  The  benefits  of subdivision three [hereof] OF THIS SECTION shall
 inure only to officers and employees of the board of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY
 or  former  division  of  parole  and  shall not enlarge or diminish the
 rights of any other party.
 A. 9097  8
 
  § 18. Subdivisions 10 and 11 of section 259-r of  the  executive  law,
 as  amended  by  chapter 322 of the laws of 2021, are amended to read as
 follows:
  10.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of law, in the case of an
 incarcerated individual whose terminal condition,  disease  or  syndrome
 meets  the  criteria for medical parole as set forth in paragraph (a) of
 subdivision one of this section, and who is not serving a  sentence  for
 one  or  more  offenses set forth in paragraph (i) of subdivision one of
 section eight hundred six of the correction law which would render  such
 incarcerated individual ineligible for presumptive release, the granting
 of  medical parole shall be determined by the commissioner provided that
 a release of such incarcerated individual shall be  in  accordance  with
 subdivision  eleven  of  this section. In such case, the provisions that
 would have applied to and the procedures that would have  been  followed
 by  the  board of [parole] RE-ENTRY pursuant to this section shall apply
 to and be followed by the commissioner.
  11. (a) After the commissioner  has  made  a  determination  to  grant
 medical  parole pursuant to subdivision ten of this section, the commis-
 sioner shall notify the chairperson of the board of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY,
 or  their designee who shall be a member of the board of [parole] RE-EN-
 TRY, and provide him or her with all relevant records,  files,  informa-
 tion  and documentation, which includes but is not limited to the crimi-
 nal  history,  medical  diagnosis  and  treatment  pertaining  to  the
 terminally  ill  incarcerated individual no more than five days from the
 date of the determination. (b) The chairperson or his  or  her  designee
 shall either accept the commissioner's grant of medical parole, in which
 case the incarcerated individual may be released by the commissioner, or
 conduct  further  review.  This  decision or review shall be made within
 five days of the receipt of the relevant records, files, information and
 documentation from the commissioner. The  chairperson's  further  review
 may  include, but not be limited to, an appearance by the terminally ill
 incarcerated individual before the chairperson or his or  her  designee.
 (c)  After  this further review, the chairperson shall either accept the
 commissioner's grant of medical parole, in which case  the  incarcerated
 individual may be released by the commissioner, or the chairperson shall
 schedule  an  appearance  for the terminally ill incarcerated individual
 before the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY.
  In the event the terminally ill incarcerated individual  is  scheduled
 to  make an appearance before the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY pursuant to
 this subdivision, the matter shall be heard by a  panel  that  does  not
 include  the chairperson or any member of the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY
 who was involved in the review of the commissioner's determination.
  § 19. Paragraph (b) of subdivision 2 of section 259-s of the executive
 law, as amended by chapter 322 of the laws of 2021, is amended  to  read
 as follows:
  (b) The commissioner, or the commissioner's designee, shall review the
 diagnosis  and may certify that the incarcerated individual is suffering
 from such condition, disease or syndrome and that the incarcerated indi-
 vidual is so debilitated or incapacitated  as  to  create  a  reasonable
 probability  that  he  or  she is physically or cognitively incapable of
 presenting any danger to society. If the commissioner does not so certi-
 fy then the incarcerated individual shall not be referred to  the  board
 for  consideration  for  release  on medical parole. If the commissioner
 does so certify, then the commissioner shall, within seven working  days
 of  receipt  of such diagnosis, refer the incarcerated individual to the
 board for consideration for release on medical parole.  However, no such
 A. 9097  9
 
 referral of an incarcerated individual to the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY
 shall be made unless the incarcerated individual has been examined by  a
 physician  and  diagnosed  as having a condition, disease or syndrome as
 previously described herein at some time subsequent to such incarcerated
 individual's admission to a facility operated by the department.
  §  20.  Section 259-t of the executive law, as added by chapter 487 of
 the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  § 259-t. Permitted activities. Where any person is granted presumptive
 release, parole, conditional release,  release  to  post-release  super-
 vision  or  any  other  type  of  supervised release, the state board of
 [parole] RE-ENTRY shall not deem a person to be in violation of and  the
 state  board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY  shall  not  terminate such granted
 presumptive release, parole, conditional release,  release  to  post-re-
 lease supervision or any other type of supervised release solely because
 such  person engaged in bona fide work for an employer, including travel
 time to or from bona fide work, during curfew times set by conditions of
 probation, parole, presumptive release, conditional release  or  release
 to  post-release  supervision.  For  purposes of this section, bona fide
 work is work performed as an employee for an  employer,  as  defined  in
 section two of the labor law.
  §  21.  Section 259-t of the executive law, as added by chapter 492 of
 the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  § [259-t] 259-U.  Permitted activities. Where any  person  is  granted
 presumptive  release,  parole,  conditional release, release to post-re-
 lease supervision or any other type of  supervised  release,  the  state
 board of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall not deem a person to be in violation of
 and the state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall not terminate such grant-
 ed presumptive release, parole, conditional release, release to post-re-
 lease supervision or any other type of supervised release solely because
 such  person participated in work related labor protests, or in a lawful
 labor dispute, strike or other concerted stoppage of  work  or  slowdown
 pursuant  to  article  twenty  of  the  labor  law or the national labor
 relations act (29 U.S.C. sections 151 et. seq.).
  § 22. Subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (c) of subdivision 1 of  section
 632-a  of  the  executive law, as amended by section 100 of subpart B of
 part C of chapter 62 of the laws of 2011, is amended to read as follows:
  (iii) is no longer subject to a sentence of probation  or  conditional
 discharge or indeterminate, determinate or definite term of imprisonment
 or period of post-release supervision or term of supervised release, and
 where within the previous three years: the full or maximum term or peri-
 od  terminated  or expired or such person was granted a discharge by the
 state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY or the department  of  corrections  and
 community supervision pursuant to applicable law, or granted a discharge
 or  termination  from  probation pursuant to applicable law or granted a
 discharge or termination under applicable federal or state law, rules or
 regulations prior to the expiration of such  full  or  maximum  term  or
 period;  and  includes  only:  (A)  those funds paid to such person as a
 result of any interest, right, right of  action,  asset,  share,  claim,
 recovery  or  benefit  of  any  kind  that  the person obtained, or that
 accrued in favor of  such  person,  prior  to  the  expiration  of  such
 sentence,  term  or  period;  (B)  any  recovery or award collected in a
 lawsuit after expiration of such sentence where the right  or  cause  of
 action  accrued prior to the expiration or service of such sentence; and
 (C) earned income earned during a period in which such person was not in
 compliance with the conditions of his or her probation,  parole,  condi-
 tional  release, period of post-release supervision by the department of
 A. 9097  10
 
 corrections and community supervision or term of supervised release with
 the United States probation office or United States  parole  commission.
 For  purposes  of this subparagraph, such period of non-compliance shall
 be measured, as applicable, from the earliest date of delinquency deter-
 mined  by  the  department  of corrections and community supervision, or
 from the earliest date on which a declaration of  delinquency  is  filed
 pursuant  to section 410.30 of the criminal procedure law and thereafter
 sustained, or from  the  earliest  date  of  delinquency  determined  in
 accordance  with applicable federal law, rules or regulations, and shall
 continue until a final determination sustaining the violation  has  been
 made  by  the  trial  court, the department of corrections and community
 supervision, or appropriate federal authority.
  § 23. Subdivision 9 of section 2 of the correction law, as amended  by
 chapter 476 of the laws of 1970, is amended to read as follows:
  9. "Diagnostic and treatment center". A correctional facility operated
 for the purpose of providing intensive physical, mental and sociological
 diagnostic and treatment services including pre-parole diagnostic evalu-
 ation, where requested by the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY, and scientific
 study of the social and mental aspects of the causes of crime.
  § 24. Subdivision 1 of section 24 of the correction law, as amended by
 section  11 of subpart A of part C of chapter 62 of the laws of 2011, is
 amended to read as follows:
  1. No civil action shall be brought in any court of the state,  except
 by  the  attorney general on behalf of the state, against any officer or
 employee of the department, which for purposes  of  this  section  shall
 include  members  of the state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY, in his or her
 personal capacity, for damages arising out of any act done or the  fail-
 ure  to  perform  any  act within the scope of the employment and in the
 discharge of the duties by such officer or employee.
  § 25. Subdivision 2 of section 29 of the correction law, as amended by
 section 12 of subpart A of part C of chapter 62 of the laws of 2011,  is
 amended to read as follows:
  2.  The  commissioner  shall  make rules as to the privacy of records,
 statistics and other information collected, obtained and  maintained  by
 the  department,  its institutions or the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY and
 information obtained in an official capacity by officers,  employees  or
 members thereof.
  § 26. Section 71-a of the correction law, as amended by chapter 322 of
 the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  §  71-a. Transitional accountability plan. Upon admission of an incar-
 cerated individual committed to the custody of the department  under  an
 indeterminate  or  determinate  sentence of imprisonment, the department
 shall develop a transitional accountability plan. Such plan shall  be  a
 comprehensive,  dynamic and individualized case management plan based on
 the programming and treatment needs of the incarcerated individual.  The
 purpose  of  such  plan  shall  be  to promote the rehabilitation of the
 incarcerated individual and their successful and productive reentry  and
 reintegration into society upon release. To that end, such plan shall be
 used  to prioritize programming and treatment services for the incarcer-
 ated individual during incarceration and any period of community  super-
 vision.  The  commissioner may consult with the office of mental health,
 the office of [alcoholism and substance abuse]  ADDICTION  services  AND
 SUPPORTS,  the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY, the department of health, and
 other appropriate agencies  in  the  development  of  transitional  case
 management plans.
 A. 9097  11
 
  §  27.  Subdivisions  6  and 8 of section 73 of the correction law, as
 amended by chapter 322 of the laws  of  2021,  is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  6.  Where  a person who is an incarcerated individual of a residential
 treatment facility absconds, or fails to return thereto as specified  in
 the  program  approved  for  him  or  her, he or she may be arrested and
 returned by an officer or employee of the department  or  by  any  peace
 officer, acting pursuant to his or her special duties, or police officer
 without  a  warrant; or a member of the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY or an
 officer designated by such board may issue a warrant for the retaking of
 such person. A warrant issued pursuant to this  subdivision  shall  have
 the  same force and effect, and shall be executed in the same manner, as
 a warrant issued for violation of community supervision.
  8. The state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY may grant parole to any incar-
 cerated individual of a residential treatment facility at any time after
 he or she becomes eligible therefor. Such parole shall be in  accordance
 with  provisions  of  law  that  would  apply  if  the person were still
 confined in the facility from which he or she  was  transferred,  except
 that any personal appearance before the board may be at any place desig-
 nated by the board.
  §  28. Subdivision 1 of section 89-e of the correction law, as amended
 by section 47 of part A of chapter 56 of the laws of 2010, is amended to
 read as follows:
  1. The alternate correctional facility review panel is  hereby  estab-
 lished  and shall consist of the commissioner, the chairman of the state
 commission  of  correction,  the  chairman  of  the  board  of  [parole]
 RE-ENTRY,  the  director  of  the  office  of probation and correctional
 alternatives, the commissioner of correction of the city  of  New  York,
 the  president  of  the  New York State Sheriffs' Association Institute,
 Inc., and the president of the Correctional Association of New  York  or
 their designees. The governor shall appoint a chairman and vice-chairman
 from among the members.
  §  29.  Subdivision 4 of section 112 of the correction law, as amended
 by chapter 322 of the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  4. The commissioner and the chair of the [parole]  board  OF  RE-ENTRY
 shall  work  jointly to develop and implement, as soon as practicable, a
 risk and needs assessment instrument  or  instruments,  which  shall  be
 empirically  validated, that would be administered to incarcerated indi-
 viduals upon reception into  a  correctional  facility,  and  throughout
 their  incarceration and release to community supervision, to facilitate
 appropriate programming both during an incarcerated individual's  incar-
 ceration  and  community  supervision,  and  designed  to facilitate the
 successful integration of incarcerated individuals into the community.
  § 30. Section 168-m of the correction law, as amended by section 20 of
 subpart B of part C of chapter 62 of the laws of  2011,  is  amended  to
 read as follows:
  §  168-m.  Review.  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law to the
 contrary, any state or local correctional facility, hospital or institu-
 tion, district attorney, law enforcement agency,  probation  department,
 state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY, court or child protective agency shall
 forward  relevant  information  pertaining  to  a  sex  offender  to  be
 discharged, paroled, released to post-release supervision or released to
 the board for review no later than one hundred twenty days prior to  the
 release  or  discharge  and  the  board  shall  make  recommendations as
 provided in subdivision six of section one hundred sixty-eight-l of this
 article within sixty days of receipt of the information. Information may
 A. 9097  12
 
 include, but may not be limited to all or a portion of the arrest  file,
 prosecutor's  file,  probation  or  parole  file, child protective file,
 court file, commitment file, medical file and treatment file  pertaining
 to  such  person.  Such person shall be permitted to submit to the board
 any information relevant to the review.  Upon  application  of  the  sex
 offender  or  the district attorney, the court shall seal any portion of
 the board's file pertaining to the sex offender that  contains  material
 that  is confidential under any state or federal law; provided, however,
 that in any subsequent proceedings in which the sex offender who is  the
 subject  of the sealed record is a party and which requires the board to
 provide a recommendation to the court pursuant  to  this  article,  such
 sealed  record  shall  be  available  to  the sex offender, the district
 attorney, the court and the attorney general where the attorney  general
 is a party, or represents a party, in the proceeding.
  §  31. Subdivision 1 of section 201 of the correction law, as added by
 section 32 of subpart A of part C of chapter 62 of the laws of 2011,  is
 amended to read as follows:
  1.  The  department  shall  have responsibility for the preparation of
 reports and other data required by the state board of [parole]  RE-ENTRY
 in the exercise of its independent decision making functions.
  §  32. Subdivision 5 of section 205 of the correction law, as added by
 section 32 of subpart A of part C of chapter 62 of the laws of 2011,  is
 amended to read as follows:
  5. The commissioner, in consultation with the chairman of the board of
 [parole]  RE-ENTRY, shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the
 issuance of merit terminations of sentence and discharges from  presump-
 tive release, parole, conditional release or post-release supervision to
 assure  that such terminations and discharges are consistent with public
 safety. The board of [parole] RE-ENTRY shall have access to merit termi-
 nation application case files and corresponding decisions to assess  the
 effectiveness  of  the  rules and regulations in ensuring public safety.
 Such review will in no manner effect the decisions made with  regard  to
 individual merit termination determinations.
  §  33. Subdivision 1 of section 206 of the correction law, as added by
 section 32 of subpart A of part C of chapter 62 of the laws of 2011,  is
 amended to read as follows:
  1.  All requests for presumptive release or conditional release shall
 be made in writing on forms prescribed and furnished by the  department.
 Within  one  month from the date any such application is received, if it
 appears that the applicant is eligible for presumptive release or condi-
 tional release or will be eligible for such release during  such  month,
 the  conditions  of  release  shall  be  fixed  in accordance with rules
 prescribed by the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY.  Such conditions shall  be
 substantially the same as conditions imposed upon parolees.
  §  34. Section 207 of the correction law, as amended by chapter 322 of
 the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  § 207. Cooperation. It shall  be  the  duty  of  the  commissioner  of
 corrections  and  community  supervision to insure that all officers and
 employees of the department shall at all times cooperate with the  board
 of  [parole] RE-ENTRY and shall furnish to such members and employees of
 the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY such information as may be appropriate to
 enable them to perform their independent decision making  functions.  It
 is  also  his  or  her duty to ensure that the functions of the board of
 [parole] RE-ENTRY are not hampered in any way, including but not limited
 to: a restriction  of  resources  including  staff  assistance;  limited
 access to vital information; and presentation of incarcerated individual
 A. 9097  13
 
 information  in a manner that may inappropriately influence the board in
 its decision making.
  §  35. Section 405 of the correction law, as amended by chapter 766 of
 the laws of 1976, is amended to read as follows:
  § 405. Duty of the department to  the  director  of  a  hospital.  The
 department  shall  notify the director of a hospital in advance of hear-
 ings to be held at such hospital as may be necessary to  carry  out  the
 duties  of the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY or the department. The depart-
 ment shall assist the department of mental hygiene  in  establishing  or
 continuing the operation of grievance procedures at such hospital. Where
 the subject matter of the grievance primarily involves a policy or prac-
 tice  of the department of mental hygiene, the commissioner shall trans-
 fer the review of the grievance to the commissioner  of  mental  hygiene
 for  resolution  pursuant  to  subdivision  three of section one hundred
 thirty-nine of [the correction law] THIS CHAPTER.
  § 36. Section 705 of the correction law, as amended by section  36  of
 subpart  B  of  part  C of chapter 62 of the laws of 2011, is amended to
 read as follows:
  § 705. Forms and filing. 1. All applications, certificates and  orders
 of  revocation  necessary for the purposes of this article shall be upon
 forms prescribed pursuant to agreement among the state  commissioner  of
 corrections and community supervision, the [chairman] CHAIRPERSON of the
 state  board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY  and the administrator of the state
 judicial conference. Such forms relating to certificates of relief  from
 disabilities shall be distributed by the office of probation and correc-
 tional  alternatives  and forms relating to certificates of good conduct
 shall  be  distributed  by  the  commissioner  of  the  department  of
 corrections and community supervision.
  2.  Any court or department issuing or revoking any certificate pursu-
 ant to this article shall immediately file a copy of the certificate, or
 of the order of revocation, with the New York state  identification  and
 intelligence system.
  §  37. Section 805 of the correction law, as amended by section 226 of
 chapter 322 of the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  § 805. Earned eligibility program. Persons committed to the custody of
 the department under an indeterminate or determinate sentence of  impri-
 sonment  shall be assigned a work and treatment program as soon as prac-
 ticable. No earlier than two months prior to the  incarcerated  individ-
 ual's  eligibility  to be paroled pursuant to subdivision one of section
 70.40 of the penal law, the commissioner shall review  the  incarcerated
 individual's  institutional  record  to  determine whether he or she has
 complied with the assigned program. If the commissioner determines  that
 the incarcerated individual has successfully participated in the program
 he  or she may issue the incarcerated individual a certificate of earned
 eligibility. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an incarcerated
 individual who is serving a sentence with a minimum  term  of  not  more
 than  eight years and who has been issued a certificate of earned eligi-
 bility, shall be granted parole release at the expiration of his or  her
 minimum  term  or  as  authorized  by  subdivision four of section eight
 hundred sixty-seven of this chapter unless the board of [parole]  RE-EN-
 TRY  determines  that  there  is  a reasonable probability that, if such
 incarcerated individual is released, he or she will not live and  remain
 at  liberty without violating the law and that his or her release is not
 compatible with the welfare of society. Any action by  the  commissioner
 pursuant  to  this section shall be deemed a judicial function and shall
 not be reviewable if done in accordance with law.
 A. 9097  14
 
  § 37-a. Section 805 of the correction law, as amended by section 226-a
 of chapter 322 of the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  § 805. Earned eligibility program. Persons committed to the custody of
 the  department under an indeterminate sentence of imprisonment shall be
 assigned a work and treatment program as soon as practicable. No earlier
 than two months prior to the expiration of an incarcerated  individual's
 minimum period of imprisonment, the commissioner shall review the incar-
 cerated individual's institutional record to determine whether he or she
 has  complied  with the assigned program. If the commissioner determines
 that the incarcerated individual has successfully  participated  in  the
 program he or she may issue the incarcerated individual a certificate of
 earned  eligibility.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of law, an
 incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence with a minimum term of
 not more than six years and who has been issued a certificate of  earned
 eligibility, shall be granted parole release at the expiration of his or
 her  minimum  term or as authorized by subdivision four of section eight
 hundred sixty-seven OF THIS CHAPTER unless the board of [parole]  RE-EN-
 TRY  determines  that  there  is  a reasonable probability that, if such
 incarcerated individual is released, he or she will not live and  remain
 at  liberty without violating the law and that his or her release is not
 compatible with the welfare of society. Any action by  the  commissioner
 pursuant  to  this section shall be deemed a judicial function and shall
 not be reviewable if done in accordance with law.
  § 38. The opening paragraph of subdivision 2 of  section  851  of  the
 correction  law, as amended by section 228 of chapter 322 of the laws of
 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  "Eligible incarcerated individual" means:  a  person  confined  in  an
 institution  who  is  eligible  for release on parole or who will become
 eligible for release on parole or conditional release within two  years.
 Provided,  however,  that a person under sentence for an offense defined
 in paragraphs (a) and (b) of subdivision one of  section  70.02  of  the
 penal  law,  where  such offense involved the use or threatened use of a
 deadly weapon or dangerous instrument shall not be eligible  to  partic-
 ipate  in a work release program until he or she is eligible for release
 on parole or who will be eligible for release on parole  or  conditional
 release  within  eighteen  months.  Provided,  further,  however, that a
 person under a determinate sentence as a second felony drug offender for
 a class B felony offense defined in article two hundred  twenty  of  the
 penal  law,  who  was  sentenced  pursuant to section 70.70 of such law,
 shall not be eligible to participate  in  a  temporary  release  program
 until  the  time  served  under  imprisonment for his or her determinate
 sentence, including any jail time credited pursuant to the provisions of
 article seventy of the penal law, shall be at least eighteen months.  In
 the  case  of a person serving an indeterminate sentence of imprisonment
 imposed pursuant to the penal law in effect after September  one,  nine-
 teen hundred sixty-seven, for the purposes of this article parole eligi-
 bility  shall  be upon the expiration of the minimum period of imprison-
 ment fixed by the court or where the court has  not  fixed  any  period,
 after service of the minimum period fixed by the state board of [parole]
 RE-ENTRY.  If  an  incarcerated  individual is denied release on parole,
 such incarcerated individual shall not be deemed an eligible incarcerat-
 ed individual until he or she is within two years of  his  or  her  next
 scheduled  appearance  before  the state [parole] RE-ENTRY board. In any
 case where an incarcerated individual is denied release on parole  while
 participating  in  a  temporary  release  program,  the department shall
 review the status of the incarcerated individual to determine if contin-
 A. 9097  15
 
 ued placement in the program is appropriate. No person convicted of  any
 escape  or absconding offense defined in article two hundred five of the
 penal law shall be eligible for temporary release.  Further,  no  person
 under  sentence for aggravated harassment of an employee by an incarcer-
 ated individual as defined in section 240.32 of the penal law  for,  any
 homicide offense defined in article one hundred twenty-five of the penal
 law,  for  any  sex offense defined in article one hundred thirty of the
 penal law, or for an offense defined in section 255.25, 255.26 or 255.27
 of the penal law shall be eligible to  participate  in  a  work  release
 program  as  defined in subdivision three of this section. Nor shall any
 person under sentence for any sex offense defined in article one hundred
 thirty of the penal law  be  eligible  to  participate  in  a  community
 services  program  as  defined  in  subdivision  five  of  this section.
 Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person who is  an  otherwise  eligible
 incarcerated individual who is under sentence for a crime involving: (a)
 infliction  of  serious  physical  injury upon another as defined in the
 penal law or (b) any other offense involving the use or  threatened  use
 of  a deadly weapon may participate in a temporary release program with-
 out the written approval of the  commissioner.  The  commissioner  shall
 promulgate regulations giving direction to the temporary release commit-
 tee  at each institution in order to aid such committees in carrying out
 this mandate.
  § 38-a. The opening paragraph of subdivision 2 of section 851  of  the
 correction  law,  as amended by section 228-b of chapter 322 of the laws
 of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
  "Eligible incarcerated individual" means:  a  person  confined  in  an
 institution  who  is  eligible  for release on parole or who will become
 eligible for release on parole or conditional release within two  years.
 Provided,  that a person under a determinate sentence as a second felony
 drug offender for a class  B  felony  offense  defined  in  article  two
 hundred  twenty  of the penal law, who was sentenced pursuant to section
 70.70 of such law, shall not be eligible to participate in  a  temporary
 release  program until the time served under imprisonment for his or her
 determinate sentence, including any jail time credited pursuant  to  the
 provisions  of article seventy of the penal law, shall be at least eigh-
 teen months. In the case of a person serving an  indeterminate  sentence
 of  imprisonment  imposed  pursuant  to  the  penal  law in effect after
 September one, nineteen hundred sixty-seven, for the  purposes  of  this
 article  parole  eligibility shall be upon the expiration of the minimum
 period of imprisonment fixed by the court or where  the  court  has  not
 fixed any period, after service of the minimum period fixed by the state
 board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY.  If  an incarcerated individual is denied
 release on parole, such incarcerated individual shall not be  deemed  an
 eligible  incarcerated individual until he or she is within two years of
 his or her next scheduled appearance before the state [parole]  RE-ENTRY
 board. In any case where an incarcerated individual is denied release on
 parole  while  participating in a temporary release program, the depart-
 ment shall review the status of the incarcerated individual to determine
 if  continued  placement  in  the  program  is  appropriate.  No  person
 convicted  of  any  escape  or absconding offense defined in article two
 hundred five of the penal law shall be eligible for  temporary  release.
 Nor shall any person under sentence for any sex offense defined in arti-
 cle  one hundred thirty of the penal law be eligible to participate in a
 community services program  as  defined  in  subdivision  five  of  this
 section.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person who is an otherwise
 eligible incarcerated individual who  is  under  sentence  for  a  crime
 A. 9097  16
 
 involving:  (a)  infliction  of  serious physical injury upon another as
 defined in the penal law, (b) a sex offense involving  forcible  compul-
 sion,  or (c) any other offense involving the use or threatened use of a
 deadly weapon may participate in a temporary release program without the
 written  approval of the commissioner. The commissioner shall promulgate
 regulations giving direction to the temporary release committee at  each
 institution  in  order  to  aid  such  committees  in  carrying out this
 mandate.
  § 39. Subdivision 1 of section 852 of the correction law, as added  by
 chapter 472 of the laws of 1969, is amended to read as follows:
  1.  The  commissioner of correction shall designate one or more insti-
 tutions for the conduct of work release programs. Upon such  designation
 the commissioner, with the approval of the [chairman] CHAIRPERSON of the
 board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY,  shall  promulgate  rules and regulations
 consistent with the provisions of this article for the administration of
 work release programs at any institution designated, and  shall  appoint
 or cause to be appointed a work release committee for such institution.
  §  40.  Subdivision 6 of section 855 of the correction law, as amended
 by section 231-a of chapter 322 of the laws of 2021, is amended to  read
 as follows:
  6. Participation in a work release program shall be a privilege. Noth-
 ing contained in this article may be construed to confer upon any incar-
 cerated  individual  the right to participate, or to continue to partic-
 ipate, in a work release program. The warden of the institution  may  at
 any  time,  and  upon recommendation of the work release committee or of
 the [chairman] CHAIRPERSON of the state board of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY  or
 his  or  her designee shall, revoke any incarcerated individual's privi-
 lege to participate in a program of work release.
  § 41. Subdivision 9 of section 855 of the correction law,  as  amended
 by section 231 of chapter 322 of the laws of 2021, is amended to read as
 follows:
  9.  Participation in a temporary release program shall be a privilege.
 Nothing contained in this article may be construed to  confer  upon  any
 incarcerated  individual  the  right  to  participate, or to continue to
 participate, in a temporary release program. The superintendent  of  the
 institution  may  at  any time, and upon recommendation of the temporary
 release committee or of the commissioner or  of  the  [chairman]  CHAIR-
 PERSON  of  the  state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY or his or her designee
 shall, revoke any incarcerated individual's privilege to participate  in
 a program of temporary release in accordance with regulations promulgat-
 ed by the commissioner.
  §  42.  Subdivisions  2 and 5 of section 856 of the correction law, as
 amended by section 232 of chapter 322 of the laws of 2021,  are  amended
 to read as follows:
  2.  If  the  incarcerated  individual  violates  any  provision of the
 program, or any rule or regulation promulgated by the  commissioner  for
 conduct  of  incarcerated individuals participating in temporary release
 programs, such incarcerated individual shall be subject to  disciplinary
 measures  to  the  same  extent as if he or she violated a rule or regu-
 lation of the commissioner for conduct of incarcerated individuals with-
 in the premises of the institution. The failure of an incarcerated indi-
 vidual  to  voluntarily  return  to  the  institution  of  his  or  her
 confinement  more  than  ten  hours  after his or her prescribed time of
 return shall create a rebuttable presumption that the failure to  return
 was intentional. Any incarcerated individual who is found to have inten-
 tionally  failed  to  return  pursuant  to  this subdivision shall be an
 A. 9097  17
 
 absconder in violation of his or her temporary release program and  will
 not be an eligible incarcerated individual as defined in subdivision two
 of  section  eight  hundred  fifty-one  of  this  [chapter] ARTICLE. The
 creation  of  such rebuttable presumption shall not be admissible in any
 court of law as evidence of the commission of any crime defined  in  the
 penal  law.  A full report of any such violation, a summary of the facts
 and findings of  the  disciplinary  hearing  and  disciplinary  measures
 taken,  shall  be made available to the board for the incarcerated indi-
 vidual's next scheduled appearance before the state  board  of  [parole]
 RE-ENTRY including any defense or explanation offered by the incarcerat-
 ed individual in response at such hearing.
  5.  Upon the conclusion or termination of a temporary release program,
 a full report of  the  incarcerated  individual's  performance  in  such
 program  shall be prepared in accordance with regulations of the commis-
 sioner.  Such report shall include but not be limited to: adjustment  to
 release,  supervision contacts, statement of any violations of the terms
 and conditions of release and of any disciplinary actions taken, and  an
 assessment of the incarcerated individual's suitability for parole. Such
 report  shall  be made available to the state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY
 for the incarcerated individual's next scheduled appearance before  such
 board.
  § 43. Paragraph (d) of subdivision 1 of section 160.50 of the criminal
 procedure law, as amended by chapter 449 of the laws of 2015, is amended
 to read as follows:
  (d)  such  records shall be made available to the person accused or to
 such person's designated agent, and shall be made  available  to  (i)  a
 prosecutor in any proceeding in which the accused has moved for an order
 pursuant  to  section  170.56  or  210.46 of this chapter, or (ii) a law
 enforcement agency upon ex parte motion in any superior court, or in any
 district court, city court or the criminal court of the city of New York
 provided that such court sealed the record, if such agency  demonstrates
 to the satisfaction of the court that justice requires that such records
 be  made  available to it, or (iii) any state or local officer or agency
 with responsibility for the issuance of licenses to possess  guns,  when
 the  accused  has  made  application for such a license, or (iv) the New
 York state department of corrections and community supervision when  the
 accused is on parole supervision as a result of conditional release or a
 parole release granted by the New York state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY,
 and the arrest which is the subject of the inquiry is one which occurred
 while  the  accused  was  under such supervision, or (v) any prospective
 employer of a police officer or peace officer as those terms are defined
 in subdivisions thirty-three and thirty-four of  section  1.20  of  this
 chapter,  in relation to an application for employment as a police offi-
 cer or peace officer; provided, however, that every  person  who  is  an
 applicant  for  the position of police officer or peace officer shall be
 furnished with a copy of all records obtained under this  paragraph  and
 afforded  an  opportunity  to  make  an explanation thereto, or (vi) the
 probation department responsible for supervision of the accused when the
 arrest which is the subject of the inquiry is one which  occurred  while
 the accused was under such supervision; and
  § 44. Paragraph (d) of subdivision 1 of section 160.55 of the criminal
 procedure law, as amended by chapter 449 of the laws of 2015, is amended
 to read as follows:
  (d) the records referred to in paragraph (c) of this subdivision shall
 be  made  available to the person accused or to such person's designated
 agent, and shall be made available to (i) a prosecutor in any proceeding
 A. 9097  18

 in which the accused has moved for an order pursuant to  section  170.56
 or  210.46  of  this  chapter,  or (ii) a law enforcement agency upon ex
 parte motion in any superior court, or in any district court, city court
 or  the  criminal court of the city of New York provided that such court
 sealed the record, if such agency demonstrates to  the  satisfaction  of
 the  court  that justice requires that such records be made available to
 it, or (iii) any state or local officer or  agency  with  responsibility
 for  the issuance of licenses to possess guns, when the accused has made
 application for such a license, or (iv) the New York state department of
 corrections and community supervision when the accused is  under  parole
 supervision as a result of conditional release or parole release granted
 by the New York state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY and the arrest which is
 the  subject  of the inquiry is one which occurred while the accused was
 under such supervision, or (v) the probation department responsible  for
 supervision  of  the accused when the arrest which is the subject of the
 inquiry is one which occurred while the accused was  under  such  super-
 vision, or (vi) a police agency, probation department, sheriff's office,
 district attorney's office, department of correction of any municipality
 and  parole  department,  for  law  enforcement purposes, upon arrest in
 instances in which the individual stands convicted of harassment in  the
 second  degree, as defined in section 240.26 of the penal law, committed
 against a member of the same family or household as  the  defendant,  as
 defined in subdivision one of section 530.11 of this chapter, and deter-
 mined  pursuant  to subdivision eight-a of section 170.10 of this title;
 and
  § 45. Paragraph (a) of subdivision 2 of section 390.50 of the criminal
 procedure law, as amended by chapter 31 of the laws of 2019, is  amended
 to read as follows:
  (a)  Not less than one court day prior to sentencing, unless such time
 requirement is waived by the parties, the pre-sentence report  or  memo-
 randum  shall  be  made  available  by the court for examination and for
 copying by the defendant's attorney, the defendant himself  OR  HERSELF,
 if he OR SHE has no attorney, and the prosecutor. In its discretion, the
 court  may except from disclosure a part or parts of the report or memo-
 randa which are not relevant to a proper sentence, or a diagnostic opin-
 ion which might seriously disrupt a program of rehabilitation, or sourc-
 es  of  information  which  have  been  obtained  on  a  promise  of
 confidentiality, or any other portion thereof, disclosure of which would
 not be in the interest of justice. In all cases where a part or parts of
 the report or memoranda are not disclosed, the court shall state for the
 record  that  a  part  or  parts  of  the  report or memoranda have been
 excepted and the reasons for its action. The action of the court except-
 ing information from disclosure shall be subject  to  appellate  review.
 The  pre-sentence  report shall be made available by the court for exam-
 ination and copying in connection with any appeal in the case, including
 an appeal under this subdivision. Upon written request, the court  shall
 make a copy of the presentence report, other than a part or parts of the
 report  redacted  by  the court pursuant to this paragraph, available to
 the defendant for use before the [parole] board OF RE-ENTRY for  release
 consideration or an appeal of a [parole] board OF RE-ENTRY determination
 or  an application for resentencing pursuant to section 440.46 or 440.47
 of this chapter. In his or her written request to the court the  defend-
 ant  shall  affirm  that  he or she anticipates an appearance before the
 [parole] board OF RE-ENTRY or intends to file an  administrative  appeal
 of  a  [parole] board OF RE-ENTRY determination or meets the eligibility
 criteria for and intends to file a motion for resentencing  pursuant  to
 A. 9097  19
 
 440.46 of this chapter or has received notification from the court which
 received  his  or  her  request  to  apply  for resentencing pursuant to
 section 440.47 of this chapter confirming that he or she is eligible  to
 submit  an  application  for  resentencing pursuant to section 440.47 of
 this chapter. The court shall respond to the defendant's written request
 within twenty days from receipt of the defendant's written request.
  § 46. Subdivision 6 of section 410.91 of the criminal  procedure  law,
 as  amended  by  section  76 of subpart B of part C of chapter 62 of the
 laws of 2011, is amended to read as follows:
  6. Upon delivery of the defendant to the reception center, he  or  she
 shall be given a copy of the conditions of parole by a representative of
 the  department  of  corrections  and  community  supervision  and shall
 acknowledge receipt of a copy of the conditions in writing.  The  condi-
 tions  shall  be  established in accordance with article twelve-B of the
 executive law and the rules and regulations of  the  board  of  [parole]
 RE-ENTRY.  Thereafter  and  while  the parolee is participating in the
 intensive drug treatment program provided at the drug treatment  campus,
 the department of corrections and community supervision shall assess the
 parolee's special needs and shall develop an intensive program of parole
 supervision  that will address the parolee's substance abuse history and
 which shall include periodic urinalysis testing.  Unless  inappropriate,
 such  program  shall  include  the  provision of treatment services by a
 community-based substance abuse service provider which  has  a  contract
 with the department of corrections and community supervision.
  § 47. Paragraph (a) of subdivision 5 of section 430.20 of the criminal
 procedure law, as amended by chapter 788 of the laws of 1971, is amended
 to read as follows:
  (a)  If  the sentence also includes a term of imprisonment, commitment
 must be to the same institution as is designated for service of the term
 of imprisonment, and the period of commitment  commences  (i)  when  the
 term  of  imprisonment  is  satisfied,  or (ii) with the approval of the
 state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY, when the  defendant  becomes  eligible
 for parole, or (iii) when the defendant becomes eligible for conditional
 release,  whichever  occurs first; provided, however, that the court may
 direct that the period of imprisonment for  the  fine  run  concurrently
 with the term of imprisonment; and
  §  48.  Subdivision 1 of section 440.50 of the criminal procedure law,
 as amended by chapter 322 of the laws of 2021, is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  1.  Upon  the  request  of a victim of a crime, or in any event in all
 cases in which the final disposition includes a conviction of a  violent
 felony  offense  as  defined in section 70.02 of the penal law, a felony
 defined in article one hundred twenty-five of  such  law,  or  a  felony
 defined in article one hundred thirty of such law, the district attorney
 shall,  within  sixty  days of the final disposition of the case, inform
 the victim by letter of such final disposition. If such  final  disposi-
 tion  results  in  the commitment of the defendant to the custody of the
 department of corrections and community supervision for an indeterminate
 sentence, the notice provided to the crime victim shall also inform  the
 victim  of  his  or  her right to submit a written, audiotaped, or vide-
 otaped victim impact statement to  the  department  of  corrections  and
 community  supervision  or to meet personally with a member of the state
 board of [parole] RE-ENTRY  at  a  time  and  place  separate  from  the
 personal  interview  between  a  member  or members of the board and the
 incarcerated individual and make such a statement, subject to procedures
 and limitations contained in rules of the board, both pursuant to subdi-
 A. 9097  20
 
 vision two of section two hundred fifty-nine-i of the executive  law.  A
 copy of such letter shall be provided to the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY.
 The  right  of  the  victim  under  this subdivision to submit a written
 victim impact statement or to meet personally with a member of the state
 board  of [parole] RE-ENTRY applies to each personal interview between a
 member or members of the board and the incarcerated individual.
  § 49. Subdivision 5 of section 190 of the judiciary law, as  added  by
 chapter 477 of the laws of 1988, is amended to read as follows:
  5.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision of law to the contrary, any
 proceeding which the supreme court  has  jurisdiction  to  entertain  to
 review  the  actions  or  determinations  of the state board of [parole]
 RE-ENTRY.
  § 50. Paragraph 1 of subdivision (d) of section 10.11  of  the  mental
 hygiene law, as amended by section 118-e of subpart B of part C of chap-
 ter 62 of the laws of 2011, is amended to read as follows:
  (1)  A person's regimen of strict and intensive supervision and treat-
 ment may be revoked if such a person violates a condition of strict  and
 intensive  supervision.  If  a  parole  officer  has reasonable cause to
 believe that the person has violated  a  condition  of  the  regimen  of
 strict  and  intensive supervision and treatment or, if there is an oral
 or written evaluation or report by a  treating  professional  indicating
 that the person may be a dangerous sex offender requiring confinement, a
 parole officer authorized in the same manner as provided in subparagraph
 (i)  of paragraph (a) of subdivision three of section two hundred fifty-
 nine-i of the executive law may take the person into custody and  trans-
 port  the  person  for lodging in a secure treatment facility or a local
 correctional facility for an evaluation by a psychiatric examiner, which
 evaluation shall be conducted within five days.  A  parole  officer  may
 take the person, under custody, to a psychiatric center for prompt eval-
 uation,  and  at  the  end  of the examination, return the person to the
 place of lodging. A parole officer, as authorized by this paragraph, may
 direct a peace officer, acting pursuant to his or her special duties, or
 a police officer who is a member of an authorized police  department  or
 force  or of a sheriff's department, to take the person into custody and
 transport the person as provided in this paragraph. It shall be the duty
 of such peace officer or police officer to take into custody and  trans-
 port  any  such  person upon receiving such direction. The department of
 corrections and community supervision shall promptly notify the attorney
 general and the mental hygiene legal service, when  a  person  is  taken
 into  custody  pursuant  to this paragraph. No provision of this section
 shall preclude the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY  from  proceeding  with  a
 revocation  hearing  as  authorized  by subdivision three of section two
 hundred fifty-nine-i of the executive law.
  § 51. Subdivision 2 of section  579  of  the  public  health  law,  as
 amended  by  chapter  322  of  the  laws  of 2021, is amended to read as
 follows:
  2. This title shall not be applicable to and the department shall  not
 have  the  power to regulate pursuant to this title: (a) any examination
 performed by a state or local government of materials derived  from  the
 human body for use in criminal identification or as evidence in a crimi-
 nal  proceeding  or  for  investigative purposes; (b) any test conducted
 pursuant to paragraph (c) of subdivision four of section eleven  hundred
 ninety-four of the vehicle and traffic law and paragraph (c) of subdivi-
 sion  eight of section 25.24 of the parks, recreation and historic pres-
 ervation law; (c) any examination performed by a state or  local  agency
 of  materials  derived  from  the  body  of  an incarcerated individual,
 A. 9097  21
 
 pretrial releasee, parolee, conditional releasee or probationer  to  (i)
 determine,  measure or otherwise describe the presence or absence of any
 substance whose possession, ingestion or use is prohibited by  law,  the
 rules  of  the  department of corrections and community supervision, the
 conditions of release established by the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY, the
 conditions of release established by a  court  or  a  local  conditional
 release  commission or the conditions of any program to which such indi-
 viduals are referred and (ii) to determine  whether  there  has  been  a
 violation  thereof;  or  (d)  any  examination performed by a coroner or
 medical examiner for the medical-legal investigation of a death. Nothing
 herein shall prevent the department from consulting with the division of
 criminal justice services, the department of corrections  and  community
 supervision,  the state police, or any other state agency or commission,
 at the request of the division of criminal justice services, the depart-
 ment of corrections and community supervision, the state police, or such
 other agency or commission,  concerning  examination  of  materials  for
 purposes other than public health.
  §  52.  The opening paragraph of subdivision 3 of section 70.30 of the
 penal law, as amended by chapter 1 of the laws of 1998,  is  amended  to
 read as follows:
  The  term of a definite sentence, a determinate sentence, or the maxi-
 mum term of an indeterminate sentence imposed on a person shall be cred-
 ited with and diminished by the amount  of  time  the  person  spent  in
 custody  prior  to  the commencement of such sentence as a result of the
 charge that culminated in the sentence. In the case of an  indeterminate
 sentence,  if  the  minimum period of imprisonment has been fixed by the
 court or by the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY, the  credit  shall  also  be
 applied  against the minimum period. The credit herein provided shall be
 calculated from the date custody under the charge commenced to the  date
 the  sentence  commences and shall not include any time that is credited
 against the term or maximum term of any previously imposed  sentence  or
 period of post-release supervision to which the person is subject. Where
 the  charge  or  charges culminate in more than one sentence, the credit
 shall be applied as follows:
  § 52-a. The opening paragraph of subdivision 3 of section 70.30 of the
 penal law, as separately amended by chapter 648 of the laws of 1979  and
 chapter 1 of the laws of 1998, is amended to read as follows:
  The  term  of a definite sentence or the maximum term of an indetermi-
 nate sentence imposed on a person shall be credited with and  diminished
 by the amount of time the person spent in custody prior to the commence-
 ment  of  such sentence as a result of the charge that culminated in the
 sentence. In the case of an indeterminate sentence, if the minimum peri-
 od of imprisonment has been fixed by  the  court  or  by  the  board  of
 [parole]  RE-ENTRY, the credit shall also be applied against the minimum
 period. The credit herein provided shall be  calculated  from  the  date
 custody  under  the  charge commenced to the date the sentence commences
 and shall not include any time that is  credited  against  the  term  or
 maximum  term  of  any previously imposed sentence or period of post-re-
 lease supervision to which the person is subject. Where  the  charge  or
 charges culminate in more than one sentence, the credit shall be applied
 as follows:
  §  53. The opening paragraph of paragraph (a), paragraph (b) and para-
 graph (c) of subdivision 1, and subdivisions 2 and 3 of section 70.40 of
 the penal law, the opening paragraph of  paragraph  (a)  as  amended  by
 section 127-c, paragraph (b) as amended by section 127-d-1 and paragraph
 (c)  as amended by section 127-f of subpart B of part C of chapter 62 of
 A. 9097  22
 
 the laws of 2011, subdivision 2 as amended by section 127-g of subpart B
 of part C of chapter 62 of the  laws  of  2011,  and  subdivision  3  as
 amended  by  chapter  427  of  the  laws of 2021, are amended to read as
 follows:
  Release  on  parole  shall  be in the discretion of the state board of
 [parole] RE-ENTRY, and such person shall continue service of his or  her
 sentence or sentences while on parole, in accordance with and subject to
 the provisions of the executive law and the correction law.
  (b)  A  person  who  is  serving one or more than one indeterminate or
 determinate sentence of imprisonment shall, if he or she so requests, be
 conditionally released from the  institution  in  which  he  or  she  is
 confined when the total good behavior time allowed to him or her, pursu-
 ant  to  the  provisions of the correction law, is equal to the unserved
 portion of his or her term, maximum  term  or  aggregate  maximum  term;
 provided,  however,  that  (i) in no event shall a person serving one or
 more indeterminate sentence of imprisonment and one or more  determinate
 sentence  of  imprisonment  which  run  concurrently  be  conditionally
 released until serving at least six-sevenths of the determinate term  of
 imprisonment  which has the longest unexpired time to run and (ii) in no
 event shall a person be conditionally released  prior  to  the  date  on
 which  such  person  is first eligible for discretionary parole release.
 The conditions of release, including those governing post-release super-
 vision, shall be such as may be imposed by the state board  of  [parole]
 RE-ENTRY in accordance with the provisions of the executive law.
  Every  person  so released shall be under the supervision of the state
 department of corrections and community supervision for a  period  equal
 to  the  unserved  portion  of the term, maximum term, aggregate maximum
 term, or period of post-release supervision.
  (c) A person who  is  serving  one  or  more  than  one  indeterminate
 sentence  of  imprisonment  shall, if he or she so requests, be released
 from the institution in which he or she is confined if granted  presump-
 tive  release  pursuant  to  section eight hundred six of the correction
 law. The conditions of release shall be such as may be  imposed  by  the
 state  board  of  [parole] RE-ENTRY in accordance with the provisions of
 the executive law. Every person so released shall be  under  the  super-
 vision  of the department of corrections and community supervision for a
 period equal to the unserved portion of his or her maximum or  aggregate
 maximum term unless discharged in accordance with law.
  2.  Definite  sentence.  A  person who is serving one or more than one
 definite sentence of imprisonment with  a  term  or  aggregate  term  in
 excess  of  ninety  days,  and  is eligible for release according to the
 criteria set forth in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of subdivision one  of
 section  two  hundred seventy-three of the correction law, may, if he or
 she so requests, be conditionally released from the institution in which
 he or she is confined at any time after service of sixty  days  of  that
 term,  exclusive  of  credits allowed under subdivisions four and six of
 section 70.30 OF THIS ARTICLE.  In computing service of sixty days,  the
 credit allowed for jail time under subdivision three of section 70.30 OF
 THIS  ARTICLE  shall  be  calculated as time served. Conditional release
 from such institution shall be in the discretion of the  [parole]  board
 OF  RE-ENTRY,  or  a  local  conditional  release commission established
 pursuant to article twelve of the correction law, provided, however that
 where such release is by a local  conditional  release  commission,  the
 person  must be serving a definite sentence with a term in excess of one
 hundred twenty days and may only be released  after  service  of  ninety
 days  of  such  term.  In  computing  service of ninety days, the credit
 A. 9097  23
 
 allowed for jail time under subdivision three of section 70.30  of  this
 article shall be calculated as time served. A conditional release grant-
 ed  under  this  subdivision  shall  be  upon  such conditions as may be
 imposed  by  the  [parole]  board  OF  RE-ENTRY,  in accordance with the
 provisions of the executive law, or a local conditional release  commis-
 sion in accordance with the provisions of the correction law.
  Conditional  release  shall  interrupt  service  of  the  sentence  or
 sentences and the remaining portion of the term or aggregate term  shall
 be  held in abeyance. Every person so released shall be under the super-
 vision of the department of corrections and community supervision  or  a
 local  probation  department and in the custody of the local conditional
 release commission in accordance with article twelve of  the  correction
 law,  for  a  period  of  one year. The local probation department shall
 cause complete records to be kept of every person released to its super-
 vision pursuant to this subdivision. The department of  corrections  and
 community supervision may supply to a local probation department and the
 local  conditional  release  commission  custody information and records
 maintained on persons under the  supervision  of  such  local  probation
 department  to  aid  in  the performance of its supervision responsibil-
 ities. Compliance with the conditions of release during  the  period  of
 supervision shall satisfy the portion of the term or aggregate term that
 has been held in abeyance.
  3.  Delinquency.  (a)  When  a  person is alleged to have violated the
 terms of presumptive release or parole  by  absconding,  and  the  state
 board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY has declared such person to be delinquent,
 the declaration of delinquency shall interrupt the person's sentence  as
 of  the  date  of  the  delinquency and such interruption shall continue
 until the releasee's appearance in response to a notice of violation  or
 the date of the execution of a warrant, whichever is earlier.
  (b)  When a person is alleged to have violated the terms of his or her
 conditional release or post-release supervision by  absconding  and  has
 been  declared delinquent by the [parole] board OF RE-ENTRY or the local
 conditional release commission having supervision over such person,  the
 declaration  of delinquency shall interrupt the period of supervision or
 post-release supervision as of the date of the delinquency. For a condi-
 tional release, such interruption shall continue  until  the  releasee's
 appearance  in  response  to  a  notice  of violation or the date of the
 execution of a warrant, whichever is earlier. For a person  released  to
 post-release  supervision, the provisions of section 70.45 of this arti-
 cle shall apply.
  (c) Any time spent by a person in custody from the time  of  execution
 of  a  warrant pursuant to paragraph (a) of subdivision three of section
 two hundred fifty-nine-i of the executive law to the time service of the
 sentence resumes shall be credited against the term or maximum  term  of
 the interrupted sentence.
  §  53-a. Subparagraph (i) of paragraph (a) and paragraph (b) of subdi-
 vision 1 of section 70.40 of the penal law, subparagraph  (i)  of  para-
 graph  (a)  as  amended by section 127-d and paragraph (b) as amended by
 section 127-e of subpart B of part C of chapter 62 of the laws of  2011,
 are amended to read as follows:
  (i)  A  person  who  is  serving  one  or  more than one indeterminate
 sentence of imprisonment may be paroled from the institution in which he
 or she is confined at any time after the expiration of  the  minimum  or
 the  aggregate  minimum  period  of  imprisonment  of  the  sentence  or
 sentences or after the successful completion of  a  shock  incarceration
 program,  as  defined  in  article  twenty-six-A  of the correction law,
 A. 9097  24
 
 whichever is sooner. Release on parole shall be in the discretion of the
 state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY, and such person shall continue service
 of his or her sentence or sentences while on parole, in accordance  with
 and  subject  to  the provisions of the executive law and the correction
 law.
  (b) A person who  is  serving  one  or  more  than  one  indeterminate
 sentence  of  imprisonment  shall,  if  he or she so requests, be condi-
 tionally released from the institution in which he or  she  is  confined
 when the total good behavior time allowed to him or her, pursuant to the
 provisions  of  the  correction law, is equal to the unserved portion of
 his or her maximum or aggregate maximum term. The conditions of release,
 including those governing post-release supervision, shall be such as may
 be imposed by the state board of [parole] RE-ENTRY  in  accordance  with
 the provisions of the executive law.
  Every person so released shall be under the supervision of the depart-
 ment  of corrections and community supervision for a period equal to the
 unserved portion of the maximum, aggregate maximum term,  or  period  of
 post-release supervision.
  § 54. Subdivisions 1-a and 3 of section 70.45 of the penal law, subdi-
 vision  1-a  as added by chapter 7 of the laws of 2007 and subdivision 3
 as added by chapter 1 of the laws  of  1998,  are  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  1-a.  When,  following  a  final  hearing,  a time assessment has been
 imposed upon a person convicted of a felony sex offense who  owes  three
 years  or more on a period of post-release supervision, imposed pursuant
 to subdivision two-a of this  section,  such  defendant,  after  serving
 three  years  of  the time assessment, shall be reviewed by the board of
 [parole] RE-ENTRY and may be  re-released  to  post-release  supervision
 only  upon  a  determination  by  the board of [parole] RE-ENTRY made in
 accordance with subdivision two of section two hundred  fifty-nine-i  of
 the executive law. If re-release is not granted, the board shall specify
 a  date  not  more  than  twenty-four months from such determination for
 reconsideration, and the procedures to be followed upon  reconsideration
 shall  be  the  same.  If  a time assessment of less than three years is
 imposed upon such a defendant, the defendant shall be released upon  the
 expiration  of  such  time  assessment,  unless  he or she is subject to
 further imprisonment or confinement under any provision of law.
  3. Conditions of  post-release  supervision.  The  board  of  [parole]
 RE-ENTRY  shall  establish  and impose conditions of post-release super-
 vision in the same manner and to the same extent as it may establish and
 impose conditions in accordance with the executive law upon persons  who
 are  granted parole or conditional release; provided that, notwithstand-
 ing any other provision of law,  the  board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY  may
 impose  as a condition of post-release supervision that for a period not
 exceeding six months immediately following release from  the  underlying
 term of imprisonment the person be transferred to and participate in the
 programs  of a residential treatment facility as that term is defined in
 subdivision six of section two of the correction law. Upon release  from
 the  underlying term of imprisonment, the person shall be furnished with
 a written statement setting forth the conditions of post-release  super-
 vision  in  sufficient  detail  to  provide for the person's conduct and
 supervision.
  § 55. Section 240.32 of the penal law, as amended by  chapter  322  of
 the laws of 2021, is amended to read as follows:
 §  240.32  Aggravated harassment of an employee by an incarcerated indi-
  vidual.
 A. 9097  25
 
  An incarcerated individual  or  respondent  is  guilty  of  aggravated
 harassment  of  an  employee  by  an  incarcerated individual when, with
 intent to harass, annoy, threaten or alarm a person in a  facility  whom
 he  or  she  knows  or  reasonably should know to be an employee of such
 facility  or  the  board  of  [parole]  RE-ENTRY or the office of mental
 health, or a probation department, bureau or unit or a  police  officer,
 he or she causes or attempts to cause such employee to come into contact
 with  blood,  seminal  fluid,  urine, feces, or the contents of a toilet
 bowl, by throwing, tossing or expelling such fluid or material.
  For purposes of  this  section,  "incarcerated  individual"  means  an
 incarcerated  individual  or  detainee in a correctional facility, local
 correctional facility or a hospital, as such term is defined in subdivi-
 sion two of section four hundred of the correction law. For purposes  of
 this  section,  "respondent" means a juvenile in a secure facility oper-
 ated and maintained by the office of children and family services who is
 placed with or committed to the office of children and family  services.
 For  purposes  of this section, "facility" means a correctional facility
 or local correctional facility, hospital, as such  term  is  defined  in
 subdivision  two  of  section  four  hundred of the correction law, or a
 secure facility operated and maintained by the office  of  children  and
 family services.
  Aggravated  harassment of an employee by an incarcerated individual is
 a class E felony.
  § 56. This act shall take effect immediately; provided, however, that:
  (a) the amendments to subdivision 2 of section 259-m of the  executive
 law  made  by section fifteen of this act shall be subject to the repeal
 of such section pursuant to section 3 of chapter  688  of  the  laws  of
 2003, as amended, and shall be deemed repealed therewith;
  (b)  the amendments to subdivision 6 of section 710.91 of the criminal
 procedure law made by section twenty-eight of this act shall not  affect
 the repeal of such section and shall be deemed repealed therewith;
  (c)  the  amendments  to  section  805  of  the correction law made by
 section thirty-seven of this act shall be subject to the expiration  and
 reversion  of  such  section pursuant to chapter 261 of the laws of 1987
 and subdivision d of section 74 of chapter 3 of the  laws  of  1995,  as
 amended, when upon such date the provisions of section thirty-seven-a of
 this act shall take effect;
  (d)  the  amendments to subdivision 2 of section 851 of the correction
 law made by section thirty-eight of this act shall  be  subject  to  the
 expiration  of  such subdivision and section pursuant to subdivision (c)
 of section 46 of chapter 60 of the laws of 1994 and section 10 of  chap-
 ter  339  of  the  laws  of  1972,  as  amended, when upon such date the
 provisions of section thirty-eight-a of this act shall take effect;
  (e) section thirty-nine of this act shall take effect on the same date
 as the reversion of subdivision 1 of section 852 of the  correction  law
 as  provided  by  section  10  of  chapter  339  of the laws of 1972, as
 amended;
  (f) section forty of this act shall take effect on the  same  date  as
 the  reversion  of subdivision 6 of section 855 of the correction law as
 provided by section 10 of chapter 339 of the laws of 1972, as amended;
  (g) the amendments to subdivision 9 of section 855 of  the  correction
 law, made by section forty-one of this act, shall not affect the expira-
 tion of such section and shall expire therewith;
  (h)  the  amendments  to  subdivisions  2  and 5 of section 856 of the
 correction law made by section forty-two of this act  shall  not  affect
 the expiration of such section and shall expire therewith;
 A. 9097  26
 
  (i)  the  amendments  to  the  opening  paragraph  of subdivision 3 of
 section 70.30 of the penal law made by section  fifty-two  of  this  act
 shall be subject to the reversion of such subdivision pursuant to subdi-
 vision  d  of  section  74 of chapter 3 of the laws of 1995, as amended,
 when  upon  such  date the provisions of section fifty-two-a of this act
 shall take effect;
  (j) the amendments to the opening paragraph of paragraph (a) and para-
 graph (b) of subdivision 1 of section 70.40 of the  penal  law  made  by
 section  fifty-three  of  this  act shall be subject to the reversion of
 such subdivision pursuant to subdivision d of section 74 of chapter 3 of
 the laws of 1995, as amended, when upon  such  date  the  provisions  of
 section fifty-three-a of this act shall take effect; and
  (k)  the amendments to paragraph (c) of subdivision 1 of section 70.40
 of the penal law made by section  fifty-three  of  this  act  shall  not
 affect  the repeal of such paragraph and shall be deemed repealed there-
 with.
  Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or  repeal  of  any
 rule  or  regulation necessary for the implementation of this act on its
 effective date are authorized to be made and completed on or before such
 effective date.