# Requires the department of civil service to establish an accessible list of persons with disabilities and veterans with disabilities employed by the state

**Bill ID:** A9177
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Chris Burdick
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9177 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9177)

## Summary

Requires the department of civil service to establish an accessible list of persons with disabilities and veterans with disabilities employed by the state; and to make persons with disabilities and veterans with disabilities employed by the state eligible for the HELP program.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9177
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 12, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. BURDICK -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Governmental Employees
 
 AN ACT to amend the civil service law,  in  relation  to  requiring  the
  department of civil service to establish an accessible list of persons
  with  disabilities  and  veterans  with  disabilities  employed by the
  state; and to make persons with disabilities and veterans  with  disa-
  bilities employed by the state eligible for the HELP program
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 55-b of the civil service law is amended by  adding
 two new subdivisions 3 and 4 to read as follows:
  3.  THE  DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH AN ACCESSIBLE AND EASILY NAVIGABLE
 ELECTRONIC LIST OF ALL EMPLOYEES HIRED UNDER  SUBDIVISION  ONE  OF  THIS
 SECTION.  SUCH LIST SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE ON THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE.
  4.  THOSE EMPLOYEES HIRED UNDER SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION, SHALL
 BE  ELIGIBLE  FOR  HIRING  THROUGH THE DEPARTMENT'S HIRING FOR EMERGENCY
 LIMITED PLACEMENT (HELP) PROGRAM.
  ยง 2. Section 55-c of the civil service law, as amended by chapter  603
 of  the  laws of 1995, is amended by adding two new subdivisions 4 and 5
 to read as follows:
  4. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH AN ACCESSIBLE AND  EASILY  NAVIGABLE
 ELECTRONIC  LIST  OF  ALL  EMPLOYEES HIRED UNDER SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS
 SECTION.  SUCH LIST SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE ON THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE.
  5. THOSE EMPLOYEES HIRED UNDER SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION,  SHALL
 BE  ELIGIBLE  FOR  HIRING  THROUGH THE DEPARTMENT'S HIRING FOR EMERGENCY
 LIMITED PLACEMENT (HELP) PROGRAM.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14470-01-4