# Increases the number of members on the farm laborers wage board from three to five

**Bill ID:** A9223
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Stephen Hawley
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9223 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9223)

## Summary

Increases the number of members on the farm laborers wage board from three to five; adds as members the commissioner of agriculture and markets and a member appointed by the Dean of the Cornell University's College of Agriculture and Life Services.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9223
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 16, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. HAWLEY, TAGUE, J. M. GIGLIO, JENSEN, MORINELLO,
  McDONOUGH, GRAY, BLANKENBUSH,  BYRNES,  BEEPHAN,  DiPIETRO,  ANGELINO,
  MILLER,  FRIEND,  SIMPSON,  SMULLEN,  NORRIS, BENDETT -- read once and
  referred to the Committee on Labor
 
 AN ACT to amend the labor law, in relation to increasing the  number  of
  members on the farm laborers wage board from three to five

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivisions 1 and 2 of section 674-a of the labor law,  as
 added  by  chapter  105  of  the laws of 2019, are amended to read to as
 follows:
  1. Wage board. The commissioner shall hereby convene a  farm  laborers
 wage  board.  The wage board shall be comprised of [three] FIVE members:
 one representative of the farm bureau, one  representative  of  the  New
 York  State  AFL-CIO,  THE  COMMISSIONER OF AGRICULTURE AND MARKETS, ONE
 MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE DEAN OF CORNELL UNIVERSITY'S COLLEGE OF AGRICUL-
 TURE AND LIFE SCIENCES (CALS) and one member appointed  by  the  commis-
 sioner,  who shall be selected from the general public and designated as
 chairperson. The wage board shall hold its first hearing no  later  than
 March  first,  two  thousand  twenty. The members of the board shall not
 receive a salary or other compensation, but shall  be  paid  actual  and
 necessary  traveling  expenses while engaged in the performance of their
 duties.
  2. Organization. [Two-thirds] THREE-FIFTHS of the members of the board
 shall constitute a quorum. The chairperson may from time to time  formu-
 late  rules  governing the manner in which the wage board shall function
 and perform its duties under this article.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the first of January next  succeed-
 ing the date upon which it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14352-02-4