# Relates to the reporting by the office of fire prevention and control

**Bill ID:** A9241
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** David Weprin
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9241 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9241)

## Summary

Relates to the reporting by the office of fire prevention and control; requires reporting statewide training hours allocated to each firefighter; directs that such report identifies the fire department or district providing training.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9241
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 22, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. WEPRIN -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Governmental Operations
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  executive  law, in relation to reporting by the
  office of fire prevention and control
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Subdivision  17  of  section 156 of the executive law, as
 added by chapter 615 of the laws of 2006, is amended to read as follows:
  17. Issue a written report to the  governor  and  legislature,  on  or
 before  February  fifteenth of each year, on firefighter training activ-
 ities.  Such report shall include at least  the  following  information:
 the  minimum  training  hours allocated on a county-by-county basis, the
 training hours requested by each county, any unfulfilled  training  hour
 requests,  [and] the number of hours used by each county on a county-by-
 county basis, AND A STATEWIDE TOTAL OF THE NUMBER OF HOURS ALLOCATED  TO
 EACH FIREFIGHTER. SUCH REPORT SHALL ALSO IDENTIFY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT OR
 DISTRICT  PROVIDING THE TRAINING INCLUDING THE NUMBER OF HOURS OF TRAIN-
 ING AND THE TYPE OF TRAINING FOR EACH  FIREFIGHTER.  IN  ADDITION,  SUCH
 REPORT  SHALL  ALSO LIST THE NAMES OF THOSE FIREFIGHTERS QUALIFIED TO DO
 INTERIOR FIREFIGHTING. THE WRITTEN REPORT SHALL BE PROMINENTLY POSTED ON
 THE DIVISION OF HOMELAND SECURITY  AND  EMERGENCY  SERVICES  WEBSITE  NO
 LATER THAN MARCH FIRST OF EACH YEAR.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14570-01-4