# Relates to electronic appearances for parking violations

**Bill ID:** A9250
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jeffrey Dinowitz
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9250 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9250)

## Summary

Provides that persons charged with a parking violation shall be able to make an electronic court appearance.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9250
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 22, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. DINOWITZ -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Transportation
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation to electronic
  appearances for parking violations
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  237 of the vehicle and traffic law is amended by
 adding a new subdivision 3-a to read as follows:
  3-A. TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS PRESCRIBING ELECTRONIC APPEARANCES
 AT HEARINGS ADJUDICATING PARKING VIOLATIONS;
  ยง 2. Section 240 of the vehicle and traffic law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 3 to read as follows:
  3. PARKING VIOLATIONS. A PERSON CHARGED WITH A PARKING  VIOLATION  MAY
 ENTER  A  PLEA OF NOT GUILTY, PERSONALLY OR THROUGH AN AUTHORIZED REPRE-
 SENTATIVE, TO OBTAIN A HEARING EITHER IN PERSON  OR  THROUGH  ELECTRONIC
 APPEARANCE. SUCH PLEA MAY BE ENTERED IN PERSON AT ANY PARKING VIOLATIONS
 BUREAU  OFFICE,  VIA  FIRST-CLASS MAIL OR ELECTRONICALLY ON THE BUREAU'S
 WEBSITE. THE PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU SHALL ADVISE THE PARTY MAKING THE
 PLEA THROUGH FIRST CLASS MAIL OR ELECTRONICALLY THROUGH EMAIL  THAT  THE
 HEARING  SHALL  BE CONDUCTED IN THE MANNER SELECTED BY THE RESPONDENT OR
 THEIR  AUTHORIZED  REPRESENTATIVE.  IN  ALL  INSTANCES,  THE  PARKING
 VIOLATIONS  BUREAU  SHALL PERMIT THE ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF DOCUMENTA-
 TION AND EVIDENCE FOR ALL  HEARINGS,  ADJOURNMENT  REQUESTS,  AND  OTHER
 REQUESTS  FOR  INFORMATION  UP UNTIL THE DATE AND TIME OF SUCH SCHEDULED
 HEARING, AND SUCH SUBMISSIONS SHALL CONSTITUTE A PERMANENT RECORD TO  BE
 MAINTAINED BY THE PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU FOR A MINIMUM OF EIGHT YEARS
 AND  THREE MONTHS. ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC NOTARIES SHALL BE
 TREATED IN THE SAME MANNER AS PRINTED MATERIAL AND PHYSICAL FILINGS BY A
 RESPONDENT OR THEIR AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OR LEGAL COUNSEL SHALL NOT
 BE REQUIRED. A VIDEO RECORDING  SHALL BE MADE CONTEMPORANEOUSLY WITH ANY
 ELECTRONIC APPEARANCE OR HEARING  AND MAY BE INTRODUCED AS  EVIDENCE  IN
 ANY FUTURE PROCEEDINGS RELATING TO SUCH VIOLATION.
  ยง  3.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13827-02-4