# Requires electronic benefit transfer systems to allow for benefit recipients to cancel or lock a credit or debit card when fraud has been suspected or reported

**Bill ID:** A9269B
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Sam Berger
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [A9269B PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9269B)

## Summary

Requires electronic benefit transfer systems to allow for benefit recipients to cancel or lock a credit or debit card when fraud has been suspected or reported; directs that any interactive voice response system associated with an electronic benefit transfer system which benefit recipients may call for support or assistance shall include an option for benefit recipients to report fraud and cancel, lock or unlock their electronic benefit transfer credit or debit card.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9269
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 23, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. BERGER -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Social Services
 
 AN  ACT to amend the social services law, in relation to requiring elec-
  tronic benefit transfer systems to include fraud detection  for  unau-
  thorized transactions
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Subdivision 1 of section 21-a of the social services law is
 amended by adding a new paragraph (c) to read as follows:
  (C) (I) ANY ELECTRONIC BENEFIT TRANSFER SYSTEM IMPLEMENTED PURSUANT TO
 THIS SECTION SHALL INCLUDE A FRAUD DETECTION MECHANISM TO PROTECT  BENE-
 FIT  RECIPIENTS  FROM  STOLEN  CARDS AND UNAUTHORIZED TRANSACTIONS. SUCH
 FRAUD DETECTION MECHANISM SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO,  REQUIR-
 ING  AUTHORIZATION FROM THE BENEFIT RECIPIENT BEFORE ANY TRANSACTION CAN
 BE COMPLETED IF SUCH TRANSACTION IS BEING MADE IN A STATE OTHER THAN NEW
 YORK.  SUCH AUTHORIZATION SHALL BE IN A FORM AND MANNER TO BE DETERMINED
 BY THE DEPARTMENT.
  (II) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH AN OPT-OUT PROCEDURE FOR ANY BENE-
 FIT RECIPIENT WHO DOES  NOT  WANT  AUTHORIZATION  TO  BE  REQUIRED  WHEN
 CONDUCTING A TRANSACTION IN ANOTHER STATE. SUCH OPT-OUT SHALL BE DONE BY
 FORM  AND  SUCH  FORM SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE IN HARD COPY AND ELECTRON-
 ICALLY AVAILABLE ON THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect six months after it shall have  become
 a law.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14361-04-4