# Prohibits the manufacture, sale, and use of wire grill brushes

**Bill ID:** A9274
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Chantel Jackson
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9274 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9274)

## Summary

Prohibits the manufacture, sale, and use of wire grill brushes.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9274
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 23, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. JACKSON -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN ACT to amend the  environmental  conservation  law,  in  relation  to
  prohibiting the manufacture, sale, and use of wire grill brushes
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Article 37 of the environmental conservation law is amended
 by adding a new title 11 to read as follows:
  TITLE 11
  WIRE GRILL BRUSHES
 SECTION 37-1101. DEFINITIONS.
  37-1103. PROHIBITION ON MANUFACTURE, SALE, AND USE OF WIRE GRILL
  BRUSHES.
  37-1105. PREEMPTION.
  37-1107. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
 § 37-1101. DEFINITIONS.
  FOR PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE, "WIRE GRILL BRUSH" SHALL MEAN A WIRE-BRIS-
 TLED BRUSH USED TO CLEAN A GRILL.
 § 37-1103. PROHIBITION ON MANUFACTURE,  SALE,  AND  USE  OF  WIRE  GRILL
  BRUSHES.
  ON  AND AFTER JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE, NO PERSON SHALL
 MANUFACTURE, DISTRIBUTE, SELL OR OFFER FOR SALE, OR USE IN THE STATE ANY
 WIRE GRILL BRUSH.
 § 37-1105. PREEMPTION.
  JURISDICTION IN ALL MATTERS PERTAINING TO WIRE GRILL BRUSHES WHICH ARE
 REGULATED PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS  OF  THIS  TITLE  SHALL  BE  VESTED
 EXCLUSIVELY IN THE STATE.
 § 37-1107. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
  THE  DEPARTMENT IS AUTHORIZED TO PROMULGATE SUCH RULES AND REGULATIONS
 AS IT SHALL DEEM NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14211-01-4