# Relates to increasing the fees certain notaries public shall be entitled to

**Bill ID:** A9294
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Charles Lavine
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9294 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9294)

## Summary

Relates to increasing the fees certain notaries public shall be entitled to from two dollars to five dollars.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9294
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 23, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. LAVINE -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Governmental Operations
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the executive law, in relation to increasing the fees
  certain notaries public shall be entitled to
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 136 of the executive law, as amended by chapter 143
 of the laws of 1991, subdivision 3 as amended by chapter 104 of the laws
 of 2022, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 136. Notarial fees. A notary public shall be entitled to the follow-
 ing fees:
  1.  For  administering an oath or affirmation, and certifying the same
 when required, except where another fee is  specifically  prescribed  by
 statute, [two] FIVE dollars.
  2.  For taking and certifying the acknowledgment or proof of execution
 of a written instrument, by one person, [two] FIVE dollars, and by  each
 additional  person, [two] FIVE dollars, for swearing each witness there-
 to, [two] FIVE dollars.
  3. For  electronic  notarial  services,  established  in  section  one
 hundred  thirty-five-c  of this chapter, a fee set through regulation by
 the secretary of state.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08499-01-3