# Relates to individual sewage disposal disclosures and providing information on the property condition disclosure statement

**Bill ID:** A9330A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Chris Burdick
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [A9330A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9330A)

## Summary

Provides that a health pamphlet shall be delivered to a vendee regarding sewage disposal systems; provides information on septic system operation and maintenance on the property condition disclosure statement.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9330
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  February 29, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. BURDICK -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Consumer Affairs and Protection
 
 AN ACT to amend the general business  law,  in  relation  to  individual
  sewage disposal system disclosures
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Subdivisions 2, 3 and 5 of section  396-s  of  the  general
 business  law,  as added by chapter 521 of the laws of 1980, are amended
 to read as follows:
  2. On and after July first, [nineteen hundred eighty-one] TWO THOUSAND
 TWENTY-FIVE every HOME SELLER AND vendor shall, either in person  or  by
 certified mail, deliver to a vendee at the time of the transfer of title
 of  the  [newly  constructed]  home  serviced  by  an  individual sewage
 disposal system a copy of the health bulletin. If the political subdivi-
 sion within which the home is located has published  a  waste  treatment
 handbook  or  pamphlet  on  individual sewage disposal systems, the HOME
 SELLER OR vendor, AS APPLICABLE, shall supply a copy  of  such  informa-
 tional material to the vendee in the same manner as the health pamphlet.
  3.  The commissioner of the department of health is hereby directed to
 modify the contents of the health pamphlet in such a  manner  that  such
 bulletin  shall  contain  information  relating  to the proper method of
 operating and  maintaining  individual  sewage  disposal  systems.  Such
 information  shall be in clear and concise language readily comprehensi-
 ble by vendees and shall identify potential problems  that  vendees  may
 encounter  with  individual sewage disposal systems. The modification to
 the health bulletin required by this subdivision shall  be  made  on  or
 before  the  effective date of this section and shall be included within
 any health pamphlet to be distributed by the  department  on  and  after
 July first, [nineteen hundred eighty-one] THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE.
  5.  Any  HOME SELLER OR vendor violating this section shall be subject
 to a fine of [one] FIVE hundred dollars.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect July 1, 2025.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14097-01-4