# Ensures that temporary protected status beneficiaries continue to receive Medicaid benefits

**Bill ID:** A9367
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michaelle C. Solages
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9367 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9367)

## Summary

Ensures that temporary protected status beneficiaries continue to receive Medicaid benefits if the federal government ends the program.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9367
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 6, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. SOLAGES, SIMON, VANEL, DAVILA, ROZIC, WILLIAMS,
  COLTON,  WEPRIN,  JEAN-PIERRE,  DICKENS,  LAVINE,  BICHOTTE HERMELYN,
  DINOWITZ, PEOPLES-STOKES, TAYLOR, EPSTEIN, CRUZ, HEVESI, SAYEGH, HYND-
  MAN,  REYES,  GLICK,  DILAN, CARROLL -- Multi-Sponsored by -- M. of A.
  COOK -- read once and referred to the Committee on Health

 AN ACT to amend the social services law, in relation  to  ensuring  that
  temporary  protected status beneficiaries continue to receive Medicaid
  benefits
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The social services law is amended by adding a new section
 364-k to read as follows:
  ยง 364-K.  TEMPORARY  PROTECTED  STATUS  BENEFICIARY'S  BENEFITS.  1.
 NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY  OTHER  PROVISION  OF LAW, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL NOT
 CANCEL, SUSPEND OR RESCIND  MEDICAL  ASSISTANCE  BENEFITS  ISSUED  TO  A
 TEMPORARY  PROTECTED  STATUS  BENEFICIARY IF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ENDS
 THE DESIGNATION OF TEMPORARY  PROTECTED  STATUS  FOR  THAT  INDIVIDUAL'S
 COUNTRY OF ORIGIN.
  2.  NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY  OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
 EXTEND  ELIGIBILITY  FOR  MEDICAL  ASSISTANCE  BENEFITS  TO  INDIVIDUALS
 FORMERLY  GRANTED  TEMPORARY  PROTECTED STATUS IF THEY MEET ALL REQUIRE-
 MENTS OTHER THAN THE REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO IMMIGRATION STATUS.
  3. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW,  THE  DEPARTMENT  SHALL
 NOT  CANCEL,  SUSPEND  OR  RESCIND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE BENEFITS ISSUED TO
 INDIVIDUALS ENROLLED  IN  THE  FEDERAL  DEFERRED  ACTION  FOR  CHILDHOOD
 ARRIVALS PROGRAM WHEN THE PROGRAM IS ENDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
  4.  NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY  OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
 EXTEND  ELIGIBILITY  FOR  MEDICAL  ASSISTANCE  BENEFITS  TO  INDIVIDUALS
 FORMERLY  ENROLLED IN THE FEDERAL DEFERRED ACTION FOR CHILDHOOD ARRIVALS
 PROGRAM IF THEY  MEET  ALL  REQUIREMENTS  OTHER  THAN  THE  REQUIREMENTS
 RELATED TO IMMIGRATION STATUS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08096-01-3