# Provides for a disability retirement for certain deputy sheriff members of a retirement system in certain cities

**Bill ID:** A9391
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Stacey Pheffer Amato
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A9391 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9391)

## Summary

Provides for a line of duty disability presumption for any condition of impairment of health caused by diseases of the lung, resulting in total or partial disability or death of certain deputy sheriff members of a retirement system in certain cities.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9391
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 6, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. PHEFFER AMATO -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Governmental Employees
 
 AN ACT to amend the general municipal law, in relation  to  disabilities
  of deputy sheriff members of a retirement system in certain cities
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The general municipal  law  is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 207-r to read as follows:
  ยง 207-R. DISABILITIES OF DEPUTY SHERIFF MEMBERS OF A RETIREMENT SYSTEM
 IN  CERTAIN  CITIES.  1.  NOTWITHSTANDING THE PROVISIONS OF ANY GENERAL,
 SPECIAL OR LOCAL LAW OR ADMINISTRATIVE CODE TO THE CONTRARY, BUT  EXCEPT
 FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE WORKERS' COMPENSATION LAW AND THE LABOR LAW, ANY
 CONDITION  OF  IMPAIRMENT  OF  HEALTH  CAUSED  BY  DISEASES OF THE LUNG,
 RESULTING IN TOTAL OR PARTIAL DISABILITY OR DEATH  TO  A  PAID  EMPLOYEE
 PERFORMING THE DUTIES OF A DEPUTY SHERIFF IN THE SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT OF
 A  CITY  WITH A POPULATION OF ONE MILLION OR MORE WHERE SUCH EMPLOYEE IS
 DRAWN FROM COMPETITIVE CIVIL SERVICE LISTS, OR  ANY  RETIRED  MEMBER  OF
 SUCH  DEPARTMENT  WHO  RETIRED  FROM A TITLE WHOSE DUTIES ARE THOSE OF A
 DEPUTY SHERIFF AND HAS BEEN RETIRED FOR FIVE OR LESS YEARS, WHO SUCCESS-
 FULLY PASSED A PHYSICAL EXAMINATION ON ENTRY INTO THE  SERVICE  OF  SUCH
 DEPARTMENT,  WHICH  EXAMINATION  FAILED  TO  REVEAL ANY EVIDENCE OF SUCH
 CONDITION, SHALL BE PRESUMPTIVE EVIDENCE THAT IT  WAS  INCURRED  IN  THE
 PERFORMANCE  AND  DISCHARGE  OF  DUTY,  UNLESS THE CONTRARY BE PROVED BY
 COMPETENT EVIDENCE.
  2. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, A DEPUTY SHERIFF MEMBER
 RETIRING PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF SUBDIVISION ONE OF  THIS  SECTION
 SHALL  RECEIVE  A  PENSION EQUAL TO THREE-FOURTHS OF SUCH MEMBER'S FINAL
 AVERAGE SALARY, AND A RETIRED MEMBER WHO HAS BEEN RETIRED FOR FIVE YEARS
 OR LESS AND WOULD HAVE BEEN ABLE TO RETIRE PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF
 SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION IF SUCH SUBDIVISION HAD BEEN IN FORCE AT
 THE TIME OF SUCH RETIRED  MEMBER'S  RETIREMENT,  SHALL  BE  ENTITLED  TO
 RECEIVE  A PENSION EQUAL TO THREE-FOURTHS OF SUCH MEMBER'S FINAL AVERAGE
 SALARY AND HAVE THEIR PENSION RECALCULATED COMMENCING WITH THE LATER  OF
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10216-03-4
 A. 9391  2
 
 THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION OR THE FIRST DAY THAT DISEASES OF THE
 LUNG RESULTED IN THE FULL OR PARTIAL DISABILITY OF SUCH RETIRED MEMBER.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  SUMMARY: The proposed legislation would provide certain Deputy Sheriff
 members  or  retirees  (within five years of their respective retirement
 date) of the New York  City  Employees'  Retirement  System  (NYCERS)  a
 rebuttable  statutory  presumption  that  a  qualifying partial or total
 disability or death related to  a  lung  disease  was  incurred  in  the
 performance of duty.
 
  ILLUSTRATION - INCREASE (DECREASE) IN EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS
  by Fiscal Year for the first 25 years ($ in Thousands)
 
  One Incident  One Incident Per Year
  Year  Disability  Death  Disability  Death
 
  2025  55  167  55  167
  2026  55  167  113  340
  2027  55  167  171  518
  2028  55  167  232  701
  2029  55  167  294  889
  2030  55  167  359  1,083
  2031  55  167  425  1,283
  2032  55  167  493  1,489
  2033  55  167  563  1,701
  2034  55  167  636  1,920
  2035  55  167  710  2,145
  2036  55  167  787  2,377
  2037  55  167  866  2,615
  2038  55  167  947  2,861
  2039  0  0  976  2,947
  2040  0  0  1,005  3,035
  2041  0  0  1,035  3,126
  2042  0  0  1,066  3,220
  2043  0  0  1,098  3,317
  2044  0  0  1,131  3,416
  2045  0  0  1,165  3,519
  2046  0  0  1,200  3,624
  2047  0  0  1,236  3,733
  2048  0  0  1,273  3,845
  2049  0  0  1,312  3,961
  Employer contribution impact beyond Fiscal Year 2049 is not shown.
 
  The potential increases in employer contributions will be allocated to
 New York City.
 
  EXPECTED INCREASE (DECREASE) IN ACTUARIAL LIABILITIES
  as of June 30, 2023 ($ in Thousands)
 
 Present Value (PV)  Per Disability  Per Death
 PV of Benefits:  429  1,416
 PV of Employee Contributions:  (40)  0
 PV of Employer Contributions:  469  1,416
 Unfunded Accrued Liabilities:  469  1,416
 A. 9391  3
 
  AMORTIZATION OF UNFUNDED ACCRUED LIABILITY
 
  Recognized as Ongoing Gain/Loss  Per Disabilty  Per Death
  Number of Payments:  14  14
  Amortization Payment:  55 K  167 K
 
  CENSUS  DATA:  The estimates presented herein are based on preliminary
 census data collected as of June 30,  2023.  The  census  data  for  the
 impacted population is summarized below.
 
  NYCERS
  Active Members
  - Number Count:  150
  - Average Age:  42.3
  - Average Service:  11.2
  - Average Salary:  81,500
 
  IMPACT  ON  MEMBER BENEFITS: Currently, a New York City Deputy Sheriff
 who becomes disabled due to lung disease would be eligible for an appli-
 cable ordinary disability retirement, generally a  lifetime  payment  of
 1/3  of salary.  The ordinary death benefit is a lump sum payment gener-
 ally equal to three times the member's salary.
  Under the proposed legislation, the  performance  of  duty  disability
 benefit  for  NYCERS  Deputy  Sheriff members who are disabled from lung
 disease would be equal to:
  * 75% of Final Average Salary (FAS), where
  * FAS is defined as 3-Year FAS for Tier 4 and 5-Year FAS for  Tier  6,
 without
  * an explicit Workers' Compensation offset.
  Under  the proposed legislation, the performance of duty death benefit
 would generally be equal to a lifetime benefit  of  50%  of  a  member's
 wages  earned  during the last year of service, plus, if applicable, the
 Special Accidental Death Benefit (SADB) payable under General  Municipal
 Law section 208-f.
  SADB  for  Deputy  Sheriffs  was enacted by Chapter 720 of the Laws of
 2023 and all accidental deaths are assumed to qualify for SADB.
  ASSUMPTIONS AND METHODS: The  estimates  presented  herein  have  been
 calculated  based  on the Revised 2021 Actuarial Assumptions and Methods
 of the impacted retirement systems.
  The number of members and eligible retirees who will  benefit  in  the
 future  from  this  fiscal  note  is  unknown. The cost of this proposed
 legislation could vary greatly depending on the number of future members
 who benefit and on their length of service, age, and salary history.  In
 particular,  the  increase  would be greater for a member who is not yet
 eligible for an ODR benefit when the disabling  lung  disease  is  diag-
 nosed.
  The  estimated  financial  impact for disabled members has been calcu-
 lated assuming 50% would have retired under an Ordinary Disability bene-
 fit, and 50% would have continued working if  the  proposed  legislation
 were not passed.
  RISK  AND  UNCERTAINTY: The costs presented in this Fiscal Note depend
 highly on the actuarial assumptions, methods,  and  models  used,  demo-
 graphics  of  the  impacted population and other factors such as invest-
 ment, contribution, and other risks. If actual experience deviates  from
 actuarial  assumptions,  the  actual  costs  could  differ  from  those
 A. 9391  4
 
 presented herein. Quantifying these risks is beyond the  scope  of  this
 Fiscal Note.
  This  Fiscal  Note  is intended to measure pension-related impacts and
 does not include other potential costs (e.g., administrative  and  Other
 Postemployment Benefits).
  STATEMENT OF ACTUARIAL OPINION: Marek Tyszkiewicz and Gregory Zelikov-
 sky  are members of the Society of Actuaries and the American Academy of
 Actuaries. We are members of NYCERS but do not believe  it  impairs  our
 objectivity  and  we  meet  the  Qualification Standards of the American
 Academy of Actuaries to render the actuarial opinion  contained  herein.
 To  the  best  of  our knowledge, the results contained herein have been
 prepared in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles  and
 procedures  and  with  the Actuarial Standards of Practice issued by the
 Actuarial Standards Board.
  FISCAL NOTE IDENTIFICATION: This Fiscal Note 2024-11 dated February 7,
 2024 was prepared by the Chief Actuary for the New York City  Retirement
 Systems and Pension Funds. This estimate is intended for use only during
 the 2024 Legislative Session.