# Relates to the use of property in a land bank for community gardens

**Bill ID:** A9403A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Angelo Santabarbara
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [A9403A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9403A)

## Summary

Permits a land bank prioritize the use of property for a community garden.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9403
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 6, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. SANTABARBARA -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Local Governments
 
 AN ACT to amend the  not-for-profit  corporation  law,  in  relation  to
  enacting the "urban farming land initiative act"
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Short title. This act shall be known and may  be  cited  as
 the "urban farming land initiative act".
  ยง  2. Section 1608 of the not-for-profit corporation law is amended by
 adding a new paragraph (k) to read as follows:
  (K)(I) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER LAW TO THE CONTRARY, EACH  LAND  BANK
 SHALL  UTILIZE  TEN  PERCENT  OF  THE  ACREAGE OF ITS PROPERTIES FOR THE
 PURPOSE OF URBAN AGRICULTURE  OR  COMMUNITY  GARDENS.  A  LAND  BANK  IS
 AUTHORIZED  TO  ENTER INTO CONTRACTS AND ANY OTHER INSTRUMENTS NECESSARY
 TO EFFECTUATE THIS PARAGRAPH.
  (II) FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS PARAGRAPH:
  (1) "COMMUNITY GARDEN" SHALL MEAN LAND BANK PROPERTY UPON WHICH  CITI-
 ZENS  OF  THE  MUNICIPALITY  IN  WHICH THE LAND BANK IS LOCATED HAVE THE
 OPPORTUNITY TO GARDEN BUT THEY DO NOT INDIVIDUALLY OWN; AND
  (2) "URBAN FARMING" SHALL MEAN THE PRODUCTION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
 SUCH AS PRODUCE AND ANIMAL PRODUCTS; THIS  MAY  INCLUDE  GROWING  CROPS,
 ANIMAL  HUSBANDRY, BEEKEEPING, AQUACULTURE OR AQUAPONICS, VERTICAL FARM-
 ING,  AND  NON-FOOD  PRODUCTS  SUCH  AS  PRODUCING  SEEDS,  CULTIVATING
 SEEDLINGS, AND GROWING FLOWERS.
  ยง  3.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14131-01-4