# Prohibits persons affiliated with terror organizations from being appointed to permanent, temporary or provisional positions

**Bill ID:** A9460
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michael Novakhov
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9460 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9460)

## Summary

Prohibits persons affiliated with terror organizations from being appointed to permanent, temporary or provisional positions in the state civil service system.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9460
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 14, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. NOVAKHOV, BROOK-KRASNY, CHANG -- read once and
  referred to the Committee on Governmental Employees
 
 AN ACT to amend the civil service law, in relation  to  prohibiting  the
  appointment of persons affiliated with terror organizations
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The civil service law is amended by adding a new section 66
 to read as follows:
  ยง 66. PROHIBITED APPOINTMENTS. 1. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER  PROVISION
 OF THIS ARTICLE, NO PERSON SHALL BE ELIGIBLE FOR PERMANENT, TEMPORARY OR
 PROVISIONAL  APPOINTMENT  TO ANY POSITION WITHIN THE STATE CIVIL SERVICE
 IF SUCH PERSON HOLDS OR HAS  HELD  MEMBERSHIP  OR  AFFILIATION  WITH  AN
 ORGANIZATION THAT IS ON THE FEDERAL TERRORISM WATCH LIST, OR SUCH PERSON
 IS LISTED ON THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE TERRORIST SCREENING
 DATABASE. FURTHER, ANY PERSON WHO CARRIED OUT, PARTICIPATED IN, PLANNED,
 FINANCED,  AFFORDED  MATERIAL SUPPORT TO OR OTHERWISE FACILITATED ANY OF
 THE ATTACKS AGAINST ISRAEL  INITIATED  BY  HAMAS  BEGINNING  ON  OCTOBER
 SEVENTH,  TWO  THOUSAND TWENTY-THREE, SHALL BE INELIGIBLE FOR ANY PERMA-
 NENT, TEMPORARY OR PROVISIONAL APPOINTMENT TO ANY  POSITION  WITHIN  THE
 STATE CIVIL SERVICE.
  2.  ANY  PERSON APPOINTED TO A POSITION WITHIN THE STATE CIVIL SERVICE
 AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS  SECTION  SHALL  SIGN  A  STATEMENT  OF
 COMPLIANCE  WITH  THIS  SECTION  SWORN  OR SUBSCRIBED TO AND BEAR A FORM
 NOTICE THAT FALSE STATEMENTS MADE THEREIN ARE PUNISHABLE AS  A  CLASS  A
 MISDEMEANOR  PURSUANT  TO  SECTION  210.45  OF  THE PENAL LAW. SUCH FORM
 NOTICE SHALL INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING LANGUAGE:
  "I UNDERSTAND THAT ANY FALSE STATEMENTS MADE HEREIN ARE PUNISHABLE  AS
 A CLASS A MISDEMEANOR PURSUANT TO SECTION 210.45 OF THE PENAL LAW."
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14455-02-4