# Relates to eligibility for ordinary disability benefits and re-employment of disability retirees of the New York city police pension fund Tier III plans

**Bill ID:** A9515AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Stacey Pheffer Amato
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9515AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9515AA)

## Summary

Modifies eligibility for ordinary disability benefits and re-employment of disability retirees of the New York city police pension fund Tier III plans.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9515--A
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 20, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. PHEFFER AMATO -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Governmental  Employees  --  committee  discharged,  bill
  amended,  ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted to said commit-
  tee
 
 AN ACT to amend the retirement and social security law, in  relation  to
  eligibility  for  ordinary  disability  benefits  and re-employment of
  disability retirees of the New York city police pension fund Tier  III
  plans
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 506 of the retirement and social  security  law  is
 amended by adding a new subdivision a-1 to read as follows:
  A-1.  THE  PROVISIONS OF SUBDIVISION A OF THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY
 TO MEMBERS OF THE NEW YORK CITY POLICE PENSION FUND.  MEDICAL  EXAMINA-
 TION  OF A POLICE PENSION MEMBER IN CITY-SERVICE FOR ORDINARY DISABILITY
 SHALL BE MADE UPON THE APPLICATION OF THE POLICE COMMISSIONER,  OR  UPON
 THE  APPLICATION  OF  SUCH MEMBER OR OF A PERSON ACTING ON SUCH MEMBER'S
 BEHALF, STATING THAT SUCH MEMBER IS PHYSICALLY OR MENTALLY INCAPACITATED
 FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF DUTY AND OUGHT TO BE  RETIRED.  IF  SUCH  MEDICAL
 EXAMINATION  SHOWS  THAT SUCH MEMBER IS PHYSICALLY OR MENTALLY INCAPACI-
 TATED FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF DUTY AND OUGHT TO BE RETIRED,  THE  MEDICAL
 BOARD  SHALL  SO REPORT AND THE BOARD SHALL RETIRE SUCH MEMBER FOR ORDI-
 NARY DISABILITY.
  ยง 2. Subdivision d of section 507 of the retirement and social securi-
 ty law, as added by chapter 890 of the laws of 1976, is amended to  read
 as follows:
  d.  If a member shall cease to be eligible for primary social security
 benefits before attaining age sixty-five, or, if receipt of social secu-
 rity benefits is not a  condition  for  disability  benefits  hereunder,
 shall  engage  in  such  employment or business activity as would render
 such member ineligible for social security disability benefits (had  [he
 or  she]  SUCH MEMBER otherwise been eligible), benefits hereunder shall
 cease.  Provided, however, if such member  is  otherwise  eligible,  the
 state civil service department or appropriate municipal commission shall
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14498-06-4
 A. 9515--A  2
 
 place the name of such person, as a preferred eligible, on the appropri-
 ate eligible lists prepared by it for positions for which such person is
 stated  to  be qualified in a salary grade not exceeding that from which
 such person retired. In such event, disability benefits shall be contin-
 ued  for such member until such member first shall be offered a position
 in public service at such salary grade. THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL NOT APPLY
 TO MEMBERS OF THE NEW  YORK  CITY  POLICE  PENSION  FUND  WHO  SHALL  BE
 GOVERNED BY SECTION 13-254 OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF THE CITY OF NEW
 YORK.
  ยง  3.  This  act  shall take effect immediately and shall be deemed to
 have been in full force and effect on and after July 1, 2009.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  SUMMARY:  This  proposed  legislation  modifies  Ordinary  Disability
 Retirement  (ODR)  eligibility,  and provides an additional ODR benefit,
 for Tier 3 members of the New York City Police Pension Fund (POLICE)  by
 removing  the  requirements  of  having  at least five years of credited
 service and being eligible for primary Social Security disability  bene-
 fits (SSDI).
 
  EXPECTED INCREASE (DECREASE) IN EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS
  by Fiscal Year for the first 25 years ($ in Millions)
 
  Year  POLICE
  2025  4.7
  2026  5.5
  2027  6.4
  2028  7.5
  2029  8.5
  2030  9.6
  2031  10.6
  2032  11.4
  2033  12.3
  2034  13.1
  2035  13.8
  2036  14.6
  2037  15.3
  2038  16.0
  2039  16.7
  2040  17.4
  2041  20.0
  2042  20.7
  2043  21.5
  2044  22.3
  2045  23.1
  2046  23.9
  2047  24.7
  2048  25.6
  2049  26.5
 
  Employer Contribution impact beyond Fiscal Year 2049 is not shown.
  Projected contributions include future new hires that may be impacted.
 
  The entire increase in employer contributions will be allocated to New
 York City.
 A. 9515--A  3
 
  INITIAL INCREASE (DECREASE) IN ACTUARIAL LIABILITIES
  as of June 30, 2023 ($ in Millions)

  Present Value (PV)  POLICE
  PV of Benefits:  80.6
  PV of Employee Contributions:  0.0
  PV of Employer Contributions:  80.6
  Unfunded Accrued Liabilities:  (17.5)
 
  AMORTIZATION OF UNFUNDED ACCRUED LIABILITY
 
  POLICE
  Number of Payments:  16
  Fiscal Year of Last Payment:  2040
  Amortization Payment:  (1.9) M
 
  Unfunded  Accrued Liability increases were amortized over the expected
 remaining working lifetime of those  impacted  by  the  benefit  changes
 using level dollar payments.
  CENSUS  DATA:  The estimates presented herein are based on preliminary
 census data collected as of June 30,  2023.  The  census  data  for  the
 impacted population is summarized below.
 
  POLICE
  Active Members
  - Number Count:  20,176
  - Average Age:  32.8
  - Average Service:  6.1
  - Average Salary:  107,600
 
  IMPACT ON MEMBER BENEFITS: Currently, active Tier 3 POLICE members are
 eligible  for  an ODR benefit if they are approved for SSDI benefits and
 have at least five years of credited service.
  Under the proposed legislation, active  or  separated  Tier  3  POLICE
 members  who  are  determined to be disabled by the POLICE Medical Board
 would be eligible for an ODR benefit, irrespective of  SSDI  eligibility
 and  credited  service.  The  safeguards provisions associated with SSDI
 would be replaced with Tier 1 and Tier 2 safeguards.
  The proposed ODR benefit would be equal  to  the  greater  of  1/3  of
 applicable Final Average Salary (FAS) or 2% of applicable FAS multiplied
 by  credited service. This benefit would be subject to an offset, begin-
 ning at age 62, equal to 50% of the primary social security  benefit  as
 defined  in  Retirement  and  Social Security Law Section (RSSL) 511, if
 any, and would be subject to annual escalation pursuant to RSSL  Section
 510.
  ASSUMPTIONS  AND  METHODS:  The  estimates  presented herein have been
 calculated based on the Revised 2021 Actuarial Assumptions  and  Methods
 of the impacted retirement systems. In addition:
  *  New  entrants were assumed to replace exiting members so that total
 payroll increases by 3% each year for impacted groups. New entrant demo-
 graphics were developed based on data for recent new hires and actuarial
 judgement.
  * For purposes of this Fiscal Note, it has been assumed that  100%  of
 members  exiting for ODR under current ODR rates would be ineligible for
 SSDI.
 A. 9515--A  4
 
  RISK AND UNCERTAINTY: The costs presented in this Fiscal  Note  depend
 highly  on  the  actuarial  assumptions, methods, and models used, demo-
 graphics of the impacted population, and other factors such  as  invest-
 ment,  contribution, and other risks. If actual experience deviates from
 actuarial  assumptions,  the  actual  costs  could  differ  from  those
 presented herein. Quantifying these risks is beyond the  scope  of  this
 Fiscal Note.
  This  Fiscal Note does not quantify the potential cost for members who
 may qualify for ordinary disability benefits before enactment.
  This Fiscal Note is intended to measure  pension-related  impacts  and
 does  not  include other potential costs (e.g., administrative and Other
 Postemployment Benefits).
  STATEMENT OF ACTUARIAL OPINION: Marek Tyszkiewicz and Gregory Zelikov-
 sky are members of the Society of Actuaries and the American Academy  of
 Actuaries.  We  are  members of NYCERS but do not believe it impairs our
 objectivity and we meet the  Qualification  Standards  of  the  American
 Academy  of  Actuaries to render the actuarial opinion contained herein.
 To the best of our knowledge, the results  contained  herein  have  been
 prepared  in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles and
 procedures and with the Actuarial Standards of Practice  issued  by  the
 Actuarial Standards Board.
  FISCAL  NOTE  IDENTIFICATION: This Fiscal Note 2024-33 dated March 21,
 2024 was prepared by the Chief Actuary for the New York City  Retirement
 Systems and Pension Funds. This estimate is intended for use only during
 the 2024 Legislative Session.