# Requires every school bus to be equipped with a stop-arm on each side

**Bill ID:** A9601
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Alicia Hyndman
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9601 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9601)

## Summary

Requires the commissioner of motor vehicles to promulgate rules and regulations to require that every school bus be equipped with a stop-arm on each side of the bus regardless of seating capacity; prohibits the operation of a school bus on public highways without a functioning stop-arm on each side of such bus.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9601
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 26, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. HYNDMAN -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in  relation  to  requiring
  every school bus to be equipped with a stop-arm on each side
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Subdivision 21-c of section 375 of the vehicle and  traffic
 law,  as  amended by chapter 430 of the laws of 2001, is amended to read
 as follows:
  21-c. (A) The commissioner, in consultation with the  commissioner  of
 transportation,  shall  promulgate  rules and regulations for the use of
 stop-arms on school buses which shall include provisions  for  a  second
 stop-arm  to be located on the driver's side as close as is practical to
 the rear corner of the bus. Every school bus designed with a capacity of
 forty-five persons or more, and manufactured for use in this state on or
 after January first, two thousand two shall be equipped  with  a  second
 stop-arm in compliance with such regulations.
  (B)  THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL FURTHER PROMULGATE, IN CONSULTATION WITH
 THE COMMISSIONER OF TRANSPORTATION, RULES  AND  REGULATIONS  TO  REQUIRE
 THAT  EVERY  SCHOOL BUS, REGARDLESS OF SEATING CAPACITY, INCLUDE A STOP-
 ARM ON EACH SIDE OF THE BUS. NO SCHOOL BUS SHALL BE OPERATED  OR  DRIVEN
 UPON THE PUBLIC HIGHWAYS OF THIS STATE WITHOUT A FUNCTIONING STOP-ARM ON
 EACH SIDE OF SUCH BUS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 which  it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition,
 amendment and/or repeal of any rule  or  regulation  necessary  for  the
 implementation  of  this  act on its effective date are authorized to be
 made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06939-01-3