# Requires all bus companies to post on their websites or at the places they sell tickets, certain information

**Bill ID:** A9640
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Ron Kim
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9640 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9640)

## Summary

Requires all bus companies to post on their internet websites or at the places they sell tickets, certain information maintained by the federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9640
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 26, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. KIM -- read once and referred to the Committee on
  Transportation
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation to requiring
  motor carriers of passengers to  post,  for  public  viewing,  certain
  information on their websites
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The vehicle and traffic law is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 509-nn to read as follows:
  ยง 509-NN. MOTOR CARRIER INFORMATION. 1. EACH MOTOR CARRIER SHALL POST,
 FOR  PUBLIC  VIEWING,  ON  ITS  WEBSITE THE INFORMATION RELATING TO SUCH
 CARRIER AS POSTED ON THE WEBSITE OF THE  FEDERAL  MOTOR  CARRIER  SAFETY
 ADMINISTRATION INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO:
  (A)  ITS  UNITED  STATES  DEPARTMENT  OF TRANSPORTATION IDENTIFICATION
 NUMBER;
  (B) ITS ON ROAD PERFORMANCE PERCENTILE;
  (C) ITS SUMMARY OF ACTIVITIES;
  (D) ITS INSPECTION HISTORY; AND
  (E) A SUMMARY OF ITS VIOLATIONS.
  2. IN THE EVENT THAT A MOTOR CARRIER  DOES  NOT  MAINTAIN  A  PUBLICLY
 ACCESSIBLE WEBSITE, SUCH CARRIER SHALL CONSPICUOUSLY POST, AT EACH PLACE
 WHERE THE MOTOR CARRIER SELLS TICKETS FOR TRANSPORTATION, A NOTICE WHICH
 PROVIDES THE INFORMATION REQUIRED BY SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION.
  3.  THE  INFORMATION  REQUIRED TO BE PROVIDED BY THIS SECTION SHALL BE
 UPDATED NOT LESS FREQUENTLY THAN ONCE EVERY THREE MONTHS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition,  amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation  of  the provisions of this act on its effective date are author-
 ized to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03549-01-3