# Removes the ability of a board of trustees and mayor to act as the board of assessors

**Bill ID:** A9658
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Carrie Woerner
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9658 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9658)

## Summary

Prohibits a member of the board of trustees and the mayor from being appointed to the board of assessors for a village.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9658
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  March 27, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. WOERNER -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Local Governments
 
 AN ACT to amend the village law, in relation to removing the ability  of
  a board of trustees and mayor to act as the board of assessors
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Paragraph b of subdivision 2 and subdivision 3  of  section
 3-301  of  the  village  law, paragraph b of subdivision 2 as amended by
 chapter 735 of the laws of 1983, are amended to read as follows:
  b. assessor or assessors, provided, however, that the board  of  trus-
 tees  by  resolution  or local law may consolidate the offices of clerk,
 treasurer, and assessor or any two of such offices. [The board of  trus-
 tees  may also determine, by local law or resolution, that such board of
 trustees shall act as the board of assessors or may appoint  such  board
 from  their  members.]  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
 paragraph, a village which has enacted a local law as provided in subdi-
 vision three of section fourteen hundred two of the  real  property  tax
 law  shall  not  have an assessor or assessors in any year in which such
 local law is in effect.
  3. The mayor, trustees and village justices shall  be  elective  offi-
 cers.  All  other officers shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to
 the approval of the board of trustees; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, NO  MEMBER  OF
 THE  BOARD OF TRUSTEES OR MAYOR SHALL BE APPOINTED A MEMBER OF THE BOARD
 OF ASSESSORS FOR THE SAME VILLAGE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the first of January next  succeed-
 ing the date on which it shall have become a law. Effective immediately,
 the  addition,  amendment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation neces-
 sary for the implementation of  this  act  on  its  effective  date  are
 authorized to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13397-01-3