# Requires agencies to undergo mandatory regular briefings

**Bill ID:** A9695
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Manny De Los Santos
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9695 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9695)

## Summary

Requires city and state agencies to undergo mandatory regular briefings.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9695
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. DE LOS SANTOS -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law and  the  general  municipal  law,  in
  relation  to  requiring  regular briefings for all state and municipal
  agencies
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1. The executive law is amended by adding a new section 164-e
 to read as follows:
  ยง 164-E. MANDATORY BRIEFINGS FOR STATE AGENCIES. 1. EVERY STATE AGENCY
 SHALL REGULARLY UNDERGO MANDATORY BRIEFINGS.
  2. SUCH BRIEFINGS SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (A) UPDATES ON PROJECTS;
  (B) FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES;
  (C) PERFORMANCE METRICS;
  (D) AVENUES FOR PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT;
  (E) PROVISIONS FOR ACCESSIBILITY, SUCH AS LIVE STREAMING  OR  RECORDED
 VIDEOS; AND
  (F) OVERSIGHT MECHANISMS AND PENALTIES FOR NON-COMPLIANCE.
  ยง 2. The general municipal law is amended by adding a new section 30-b
 to read as follows:
  ยง 30-B. MANDATORY BRIEFINGS FOR MUNICIPAL AGENCIES. 1. EVERY MUNICIPAL
 AGENCY SHALL REGULARLY UNDERGO MANDATORY BRIEFINGS.
  2. SUCH BRIEFINGS SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (A) UPDATES ON PROJECTS;
  (B) FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES;
  (C) PERFORMANCE METRICS;
  (D) AVENUES FOR PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT;
  (E)  PROVISIONS  FOR ACCESSIBILITY, SUCH AS LIVE STREAMING OR RECORDED
 VIDEOS; AND
  (F) OVERSIGHT MECHANISMS AND PENALTIES FOR NON-COMPLIANCE.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15028-01-4