# Ratifies and confirms the creation of water district no. 14 of the town of Monroe; and authorizes the issuance of bonds or notes by such town to finance certain inter-fund borrowings by such water district

**Bill ID:** A9704
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Karl Brabenec
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9704 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9704)

## Summary

Ratifies and confirms the creation of water district number 14 of the town of Monroe, made up of the water system previously owned and operated by Orchard Hill Water Company and which has been owned and operated by the town of Monroe by mandate from the public service commission since 2013; authorizes the issuance of bonds or notes by such town to finance certain inter-fund borrowings by such water district.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9704
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. BRABENEC -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Local Governments
 
 AN  ACT  to  ratify and confirm the creation of water district no. 14 of
  the town of Monroe and to authorize the issuance of bonds or notes  by
  the  town  of Monroe to finance certain inter-fund borrowings by water
  district no. 14 from such town's general fund

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
 the establishment of water district number 14 within the town of Monroe,
 made  up  of  the  water system previously owned and operated by Orchard
 Hill Water Company and which has been owned and operated by the town  of
 Monroe  by  mandate  from  the  public service commission since 2013, is
 hereby ratified and confirmed. Said water district established  pursuant
 to this act shall be funded, operated, expanded and otherwise controlled
 in  accordance  with  the provisions of articles 12 and 12-A of the town
 law and the provisions of this act. To the extent that the provisions of
 this act shall in any way be in conflict with articles 12  and  12-A  of
 the town law, the provisions of this act shall be controlling.
  ยง  2.  The  town  of  Monroe  is authorized to issue bonds or notes in
 accordance with the local finance law to finance the  costs  of  certain
 capital  improvements  made  by such town at the time such town acquired
 the water system that is currently operated within water district number
 14.  The issuance of said bonds or notes shall not  be  subject  to  the
 approval of the state comptroller.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14271-01-4