# Requires hospitals and residential health care facilities to implement a pressure ulcer prevention program

**Bill ID:** A9718BA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Amy Paulin
**Status:** Vetoed
**PDF:** [A9718BA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9718BA)

## Summary

Requires hospitals and residential health care facilities to implement a pressure ulcer prevention program; directs the commissioner of health to report on current reimbursement options to reduce pressure ulcers; provides for the establishment of a pressure ulcer prevention center of excellence.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9718--A
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. PAULIN, WEINSTEIN -- read once and referred to
  the Committee on Health -- committee discharged, bill amended, ordered
  reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to  requiring  hospi-
  tals  and  residential  health care facilities to implement a pressure
  ulcer prevention program

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Section 2803 of the public health law is amended by adding
 a new subdivision 15 to read as follows:
  15. (A) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL REQUIRE EACH GENERAL HOSPITAL AND RESI-
 DENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT A  PRESSURE  ULCER
 PREVENTION PROGRAM.
  (B)  WITHIN  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTY  DAYS  OF THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS
 SUBDIVISION, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL EVALUATE CURRENT REIMBURSEMENT POLI-
 CIES IN REGARD TO PRESSURE ULCER PREVENTION PROGRAMS  INCLUDING  DURABLE
 MEDICAL  EQUIPMENT,  EDUCATION AND TRAINING. WITHIN SIX MONTHS AFTER THE
 EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SUBDIVISION, THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL  DEVELOP  A
 MENU  OF  REIMBURSEMENT  ALTERNATIVES THAT WOULD REDUCE THE INCIDENCE OF
 PRESSURE ULCERS ACROSS ALL HEALTH CARE SETTINGS.
  (C) BY OCTOBER FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR THE COMMISSIONER  SHALL
 ESTABLISH  A  PRESSURE  ULCER PREVENTION CENTER OF EXCELLENCE WITHIN THE
 DEPARTMENT.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14439-02-4