# Relates to certain information provided to incarcerated individuals upon their release

**Bill ID:** A9733
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Erik Dilan
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9733 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9733)

## Summary

Relates to certain information provided to incarcerated individuals upon their release, relating to the payment of funds required by section one hundred twenty-five of this article in the form of an electronic benefit transfer card.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9733
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. DILAN -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Correction
 
 AN ACT to amend the correction law, in relation to  certain  information
  provided to incarcerated individuals upon their release
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The correction law is amended by adding a new section 125-a
 to read as follows:
  ยง 125-A. NOTICE OF FEES AND CHARGES  FOR  DEBIT  CARDS  PROVIDED  UPON
 RELEASE.  1.  FOR  THE  PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, A "RELEASE DEBIT CARD"
 SHALL MEAN THE PAYMENT OF FUNDS REQUIRED BY SECTION ONE HUNDRED  TWENTY-
 FIVE OF THIS ARTICLE IN THE FORM OF AN ELECTRONIC BENEFIT TRANSFER CARD.
  2. ANY FINANCIAL INSTITUTION THAT ENTERS INTO A CONTRACT WITH NEW YORK
 STATE  TO  ISSUE  RELEASE DEBIT CARDS SHALL PROVIDE A CLEAR, UNDERSTAND-
 ABLE, AND DETAILED SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES WITH EACH  SUCH  RELEASE
 DEBIT CARD.
  3. SUCH SCHEDULE OF FEES SHALL:
  (A) BE PRESENTED IN A CLEAR AND CONSPICUOUS MANNER, BE EASILY ACCESSI-
 BLE, AND WRITTEN IN PLAIN LANGUAGE;
  (B)  INCLUDE,  BUT  SHALL NOT BE LIMITED TO, FEES FOR ATM USE, BALANCE
 INQUIRIES, FUND TRANSFERS, CARD REPLACEMENT,  ACCOUNT  MAINTENANCE,  AND
 CUSTOMER SERVICE INTERACTIONS;
  (C)  BE  PROVIDED  IN  PHYSICAL  FORMS  AS A SEPARATE DOCUMENT AND, IF
 FEASIBLE, ELECTRONIC FORMS AS A  SEPARATE  ATTACHMENT  UPON  THE  CARD'S
 ISSUANCE;
  (D) BE AVAILABLE ON THE OFFICIAL WEBSITE OF THE CARD PROVIDER; AND
  (E) BE PROVIDED IN THE SIX MOST COMMON NON-ENGLISH LANGUAGES SPOKEN BY
 INDIVIDUALS WITH LIMITED-ENGLISH PROFICIENCY IN NEW YORK STATE;
  4. (A) CHANGES TO THE SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES SHALL OCCUR NO MORE
 FREQUENTLY THAN ONCE PER YEAR AND SHALL BE COMMUNICATED TO THE CARDHOLD-
 ER AT LEAST SIXTY DAYS BEFORE TAKING EFFECT.
  (B)  NOTIFICATION OF CHANGES TO THE SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES SHALL
 BE MADE THROUGH PHYSICAL MEANS AND, IF FEASIBLE, ELECTRONIC MEANS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15035-02-4