# Establishes an EBT card replacement program

**Bill ID:** A9859
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Erik Dilan
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9859 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9859)

## Summary

Directs the commissioner of the office of temporary and disability assistance to develop and implement a program to replace all EBT cards issued in the state which utilize magnetic strips with cards that utilize chip technology.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9859
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 24, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. DILAN -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Social Services
 
 AN ACT to amend the social services law, in relation to establishing  an
  EBT card replacement program
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The social services law is amended by adding a new  section
 131-sss to read as follows:
  ยง  131-SSS.  PUBLIC  BENEFIT CARD REPLACEMENT. 1. DEFINITIONS. FOR THE
 PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE  THE  FOLLOWING
 MEANINGS:
  (A) "COMMISSIONER" SHALL MEAN THE COMMISSIONER OF THE OFFICE OF TEMPO-
 RARY AND DISABILITY ASSISTANCE.
  (B) "OFFICE" OR "OTDA" SHALL MEAN THE OFFICE OF TEMPORARY AND DISABIL-
 ITY ASSISTANCE.
  (C)  "EBT  CARD" SHALL MEAN AN ELECTRONIC BENEFIT TRANSFER CARD ISSUED
 FOR ACCESS TO BENEFITS PROVIDED PURSUANT TO THIS CHAPTER.
  2. WITHIN ONE YEAR OF THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION, THE  COMMIS-
 SIONER  SHALL  DEVELOP  AND IMPLEMENT A PROGRAM TO REPLACE ALL EBT CARDS
 ISSUED IN THE STATE  WHICH  UTILIZE  MAGNETIC  STRIPS  WITH  CARDS  THAT
 UTILIZE  CHIP  TECHNOLOGY.  THE OFFICE SHALL COORDINATE WITH ALL COMMIS-
 SIONERS OF SOCIAL SERVICES AND EBT CARD  ISSUERS  WITHIN  THE  STATE  TO
 IMPLEMENT SUCH CARD REPLACEMENT PROGRAM.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15142-01-4