# Provides for the election of judges to the city-wide Courts of Civil and Criminal jurisdiction within the City of New York

**Bill ID:** A9858
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Rodneyse Bichotte Hermelyn
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9858 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9858)

## Summary

Relates to the selection of judges to Family Court within the City of New York.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9858
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 24, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of A. BICHOTTE HERMELYN -- read once and referred to
  the Committee on Judiciary
 
  CONCURRENT RESOLUTION OF THE SENATE AND ASSEMBLY
 
 proposing an amendment to article 6 of the constitution, in relation  to
  the selection of judges to Family Court within the City of New York
 
  Section  1.  Resolved  (if  the  Senate concur), That subdivision a of
 section 15 of article 6 of  the  constitution  be  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  a.  The legislature shall by law establish a single court of city-wide
 civil jurisdiction and a single court of city-wide criminal jurisdiction
 in and for the city of New  York  and  the  legislature  may,  upon  the
 request  of  the mayor and the local legislative body of the city of New
 York, merge the two courts into one city-wide court of  both  civil  and
 criminal  jurisdiction.  The said city-wide courts shall consist of such
 number of judges as may be provided by law. The judges of the  court  of
 city-wide  civil  jurisdiction shall be residents of such city and shall
 be chosen for terms of  ten  years  by  the  electors  of  the  counties
 included within the city of New York from districts within such counties
 established by law. The judges of the court of city-wide criminal juris-
 diction shall be residents of such city and shall be appointed for terms
 of ten years by the mayor of the city of New York.  THE JUDGES OF FAMILY
 COURT  SHALL  BE RESIDENTS OF SUCH CITY AND SHALL BE CHOSEN FOR TERMS OF
 TEN  YEARS  BY  THE  ELECTORS  OF  THE  COUNTIES INCLUDED  WITHIN  THE
 CITY OF NEW YORK FROM DISTRICTS WITHIN SUCH COUNTIES ESTABLISHED BY LAW.
  ยง  2. Resolved (if the Senate concur), That the foregoing amendment be
 referred to the first regular legislative session  convening  after  the
 next  succeeding  general  election  of members of the assembly, and, in
 conformity with  section  1  of  article  19  of  the  constitution,  be
 published for 3 months previous to the time of such election.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD89106-02-3