# Establishes a registry to help locate individuals with autism, Alzheimer's and dementia in the event they go missing

**Bill ID:** A9873
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Angelo Santabarbara
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9873 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9873)

## Summary

Establishes a voluntary registry of individuals with autism, Alzheimer's or dementia who may be at risk of wandering away from home; creates a standardized form available that may be submitted to local law enforcement agencies by family members and caregivers of such individuals that would include identifying information and may include a photograph of the registrant.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9873
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 24, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M.  of  A. SANTABARBARA -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Governmental Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law, in relation to  assisting  state  and
  local  law  enforcement  agencies in establishing a registry to locate
  certain missing individuals
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 837 of the executive law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 24 to read as follows:
  24.  PROMULGATE,  IN  CONSULTATION WITH THE COMMISSIONER OF THE OFFICE
 FOR PEOPLE WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES, A STANDARDIZED FORM THAT MAY
 BE USED BY STATE AND LOCAL  LAW  ENFORCEMENT  AGENCIES  AS  A  VOLUNTARY
 REGISTRY  TO  HELP  LOCATE PERSONS DIAGNOSED WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISOR-
 DERS, ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE OR OTHER DEMENTIA, OR WHO ARE OTHERWISE UNABLE
 TO COMMUNICATE AND WHO LOSE THE ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE FAMILIAR PLACES  OR
 FACES.  SUCH  FORM  MAY  INCLUDE  IDENTIFYING INFORMATION ON THE MISSING
 REGISTRANT SUCH AS PHYSICAL FEATURES, MEDICAL  CONDITIONS,  WHETHER  THE
 PERSON  IS  NON-VERBAL, AND NAMES OF FAMILY OR FRIENDS TO CONTACT IF THE
 PERSON IS LOCATED. SUCH FORM MAY ALSO PROVIDE FOR A  PHOTOGRAPH  OF  THE
 REGISTRANT TO BE SUBMITTED WITH THE FORM.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.  Effective  immediately,  the  addition,  amendment
 and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implementation
 of  this  act  on  its  effective  date  are  authorized  to be made and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11831-01-3