# Relates to prohibiting charges for the issuance of a certificate of still birth or fetal death

**Bill ID:** A9896A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John Zaccaro Jr.
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9896A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9896A)

## Summary

Prohibits charging a fee for the issuance of a certificate of still birth or fetal death.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9896
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 26, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. ZACCARO -- read once and referred to the Commit-
  tee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law and the administrative code of the
  city of New York, in relation to prohibiting charges for the  issuance
  of a certificate of still birth or fetal death
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 9 of section 4160-a of the public  health  law,
 as  added  by  chapter  552  of  the laws of 2011, is amended to read as
 follows:
  9. The registrar may NOT charge [a] ANY fee  for  the  issuance  of  a
 certificate  under  this section [equal to the fee authorized by law for
 the certification of a birth or death].
  ยง 2. Section 4160 of the public health law is amended by adding a  new
 subdivision 6 to read as follows:
  6.  A  LOCAL  REGISTRAR  SHALL  NOT CHARGE A FEE FOR THE ISSUANCE OF A
 CERTIFICATE OF FETAL DEATH UNDER THIS ARTICLE.
  ยง 3. Subdivision b of section 17-169 of the administrative code of the
 city of New York is amended to read as follows:
  b. A transcript of a record of fetal death, or death, upon such  forms
 as  the  department shall prescribe, shall be issued upon request unless
 it does not appear to be necessary or required for a proper purpose. The
 board may prescribe reasonable fees for  searches  made  of  records  of
 birth[, fetal death,] or death, and the usual fees for copies of records
 to be paid for certifications of birth and for transcripts of records of
 birth[,  fetal  death,]  or death, and in what cases the payment of fees
 may be waived. THE BOARD SHALL NOT PRESCRIBE  OR  CHARGE  ANY  FEES  FOR
 SEARCHES  MADE  OF  RECORDS  OF  FETAL  DEATH  OR FOR THE TRANSCRIPTS OF
 RECORDS OF FETAL DEATH.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15177-01-4