# Prohibits the taking of horseshoe crabs or the eggs of horseshoe crabs from the waters of this state beginning January first, two thousand twenty-five

**Bill ID:** A9891
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Fred Thiele
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9891 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9891)

## Summary

Prohibits the taking of horseshoe crabs or the eggs of horseshoe crabs from the waters of this state beginning January first, two thousand twenty-five; permits the department of environmental conservation to authorize certain taking of horseshoe crabs by permit for bona fide educational or scientific purposes.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9891
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 26, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. THIELE -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  environmental  conservation law, in relation to
  prohibiting the taking of horseshoe crabs or  the  eggs  of  horseshoe
  crabs from the waters of this state
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 1  of  section  13-0331  of  the  environmental
 conservation  law,  as  amended  by  chapter 447 of the laws of 2017, is
 amended and a new subdivision 9 is added to read as follows:
  1. No person shall take crabs[,  including  horseshoe  crabs  (Limulus
 sp.)]  for commercial purposes without first obtaining a permit from the
 department. For purposes of this subdivision, a presumption of  "commer-
 cial  purposes" shall be made wherein one takes or lands more than fifty
 crabs in any one day or sells or barters or offers for  sale  or  barter
 any  crabs  he  or she has taken. Permits shall be issued to individuals
 only but may be endorsed for use on a vessel, in  which  case  it  shall
 cover all persons on board such vessel.
  9.  A. NO PERSON SHALL, BEGINNING ON JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWEN-
 TY-FIVE, TAKE HORSESHOE CRABS (LIMULUS SP.) OR  THE  EGGS  OF  HORSESHOE
 CRABS, INCLUDING FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES, FROM THE WATERS OF THIS STATE.
  B.  NOTWITHSTANDING THE PROVISIONS OF PARAGRAPH A OF THIS SUBDIVISION,
 THE DEPARTMENT MAY AUTHORIZE THE TAKING OF HORSESHOE CRABS BY PERMIT FOR
 BONA FIDE EDUCATIONAL OR SCIENTIFIC  PURPOSES  PROVIDED  THE  DEPARTMENT
 DETERMINES  THAT  SUCH  TAKING WILL NOT CAUSE HARM TO THE HORSESHOE CRAB
 POPULATION IN THIS STATE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect January 1, 2025.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14671-03-4