# Requires an X gender marker to be included in certain documents utilized by state agencies, public authorities and municipalities

**Bill ID:** A9898
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Tony Simone
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9898 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9898)

## Summary

Requires an "X" gender marker to be included in documents that request that a person identify their gender or sex utilized by state agencies, public authorities and municipalities.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9898
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 26, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. SIMONE -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Governmental Operations
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  executive law and the general municipal law, in
  relation to requiring an "X" gender marker to be included  in  certain
  documents  utilized  by state agencies, public authorities and munici-
  palities

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The executive law is amended by adding a new section 170-h
 to read as follows:
  ยง 170-H. GENDER MARKERS IN STATE AND  MUNICIPAL  FORMS.  ANY  FORM  OR
 PREPRINTED DOCUMENT UTILIZED BY A STATE AGENCY OR PUBLIC AUTHORITY OR BY
 A  MUNICIPALITY THAT REQUESTS THAT A PERSON IDENTIFY THEIR GENDER OR SEX
 SHALL INCLUDE, IN ADDITION TO MALE AND FEMALE  GENDER  MARKERS,  AN  "X"
 GENDER  MARKER  TO BE AVAILABLE FOR UTILIZATION BY ANY PERSON COMPLETING
 THE FORM WHO DOES NOT IDENTIFY AS MALE OR FEMALE. ANY FORM OR PREPRINTED
 DOCUMENT REQUESTING THAT A PERSON IDENTIFY THEIR GENDER OR SEX SHALL  BE
 AMENDED NO LATER THAN JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE TO INCLUDE
 SUCH "X" GENDER MARKER.
  ยง  2.  The  general  municipal  law is amended by adding a new section
 99-aa to read as follows:
  ยง 99-AA. GENDER MARKERS IN MUNICIPAL FORMS.  ANY FORM  OR  PREPRINTED
 DOCUMENT UTILIZED BY A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION THAT REQUESTS THAT A PERSON
 IDENTIFY  THEIR  GENDER  OR  SEX  SHALL INCLUDE, IN ADDITION TO MALE AND
 FEMALE GENDER MARKERS, AN "X" GENDER MARKER TO BE AVAILABLE FOR UTILIZA-
 TION BY ANY PERSON COMPLETING THE FORM WHO DOES NOT IDENTIFY AS MALE  OR
 FEMALE.  THE  GOVERNING  BOARD OF EACH MUNICIPAL CORPORATION SHALL AMEND
 ANY FORM OR PREPRINTED DOCUMENT REQUESTING THAT A PERSON IDENTIFY  THEIR
 GENDER  OR  SEX NO LATER THAN JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE TO
 INCLUDE SUCH "X" GENDER MARKER.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03261-03-4