# Allows certain reusable beverage containers in sports venues

**Bill ID:** A9890B
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kenny Burgos
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [A9890B PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9890B)

## Summary

Allows certain reusable beverage containers in sports venues.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9890
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 26, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. BURGOS -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Consumer Affairs and Protection
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  general  business  law, in relation to allowing
  certain reusable beverage containers in sports venues
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The general business law is amended by adding a new section
 391-r to read as follows:
  ยง  391-R.  REUSABLE  BEVERAGE  CONTAINERS  IN  SPORTS  VENUES.  1. FOR
 PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE  THE  FOLLOWING
 MEANINGS:
  (A)  "REUSABLE  BEVERAGE  CONTAINER"  MEANS  A DRINKING VESSEL THAT IS
 COMPOSED PRIMARILY OF ALUMINUM OR STAINLESS STEEL, AND IS  DESIGNED  AND
 MANUFACTURED  TO  BE  CAPABLE  OF MULTIPLE REUSES, INCLUDING A BOTTLE OR
 CUP.
  (B) "SPORTS VENUE" MEANS A BUILDING,  STRUCTURE,  OR  PLACE  IN  WHICH
 PROFESSIONAL OR COLLEGIATE SPORTING COMPETITIONS ARE HELD.
  2.  A  SPORTS  VENUE  SHALL  NOT  PROHIBIT AN INDIVIDUAL ATTENDING ANY
 PROFESSIONAL OR COLLEGIATE SPORTING COMPETITION  IN  SUCH  SPORTS  VENUE
 FROM  BRINGING  A  REUSABLE  BEVERAGE  CONTAINER  INTO THE SPORTS VENUE;
 PROVIDED, HOWEVER:
  (A) A SPORTS VENUE MAY REQUIRE THAT REUSABLE  BEVERAGE  CONTAINERS  BE
 EMPTY UPON ENTERING THE SPORTS VENUE.
  (B)  A  SPORTS VENUE MAY RESTRICT REUSABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS CAPABLE
 OF HOLDING MORE THAN TWENTY-FOUR FLUID OUNCES.
  3. ANY SPORTS VENUE THAT VIOLATES THIS SECTION OR ANY RULE PROMULGATED
 PURSUANT THERETO SHALL BE LIABLE FOR A CIVIL PENALTY  RECOVERABLE  IN  A
 CIVIL ACTION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15219-01-4