# Establishes the infill housing pilot program in the city of Buffalo

**Bill ID:** A9918
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Crystal Peoples-Stokes
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9918 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9918)

## Summary

Establishes the infill housing pilot program in the city of Buffalo which shall provide capital subsidies for the purpose of building two thousand one- to two- family housing units.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9918
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  April 26, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  M. of A. PEOPLES-STOKES -- read once and referred to the
  Committee on Housing
 
 AN ACT to amend the private housing finance law, in relation  to  estab-
  lishing the infill housing pilot program in the city of Buffalo
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The private housing finance law is amended by adding a  new
 article 32 to read as follows:
  ARTICLE XXXII
  INFILL HOUSING PILOT PROGRAM
 SECTION 1290. LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.
  1291. INFILL HOUSING PILOT PROGRAM.
  ยง  1290.  LEGISLATIVE  PURPOSE.  IT  IS HEREBY DECLARED AND FOUND THAT
 THERE EXISTS ACROSS UPSTATE NEW YORK, AND PARTICULARLY IN  THE  CITY  OF
 BUFFALO,  A SHORTAGE OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS AVAILABLE FOR PURCHASE.
 IT IS FURTHER FOUND THAT HOMEOWNERSHIP IS ESSENTIAL FOR BUILDING GENERA-
 TIONAL WEALTH, AND THAT THE STATE THEREFORE HAS AN INTEREST IN PROMOTING
 HOMEOWNERSHIP. IN ORDER, FURTHER, TO PROMOTE HOMEOWNERSHIP, IT IS HEREBY
 DECLARED THAT ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS SHOULD BE  MADE  TO  PROVIDE  PUBLIC
 MONIES  FOR  THE  PURPOSES  OF BUILDING TWO THOUSAND ONE- TO TWO- FAMILY
 HOUSING UNITS IN THE CITY OF BUFFALO FOR PURCHASE  BY  LOW  TO  MODERATE
 INCOME  BUYERS  LIVING IN OR NEAR THE CENSUS TRACT WHERE THE PROPERTY IS
 LOCATED.  THE NECESSITY IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST  FOR  THE  PROVISIONS  OF
 THIS  ARTICLE  IS  HEREBY  DECLARED  AS A MATTER OF LEGISLATIVE DETERMI-
 NATION.
  ยง 1291. INFILL HOUSING PILOT PROGRAM.  THE  DIVISION  OF  HOUSING  AND
 COMMUNITY  RENEWAL  SHALL  MAKE  CAPITAL  SUBSIDIES  AVAILABLE  FOR  THE
 PURPOSES OF BUILDING TWO THOUSAND ONE- TO TWO- FAMILY HOUSING  UNITS  IN
 THE  CITY  OF  BUFFALO  IN  A  FIVE  YEAR PERIOD. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL
 PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS SUFFICIENT FOR THE CREATION  OF  A  NEW
 PROGRAM  FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF BUILDING SUCH ONE- TO TWO- FAMILY HOUSING
 UNITS AND SHALL PRIORITIZE FOR DEVELOPMENT VACANT LOTS OWNED BY THE CITY
 OF BUFFALO.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14432-05-4