# Relates to providing parents of school children with information on the safe storage of firearms

**Bill ID:** A9983
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Christopher Eachus
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [A9983 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/A9983)

## Summary

Directs the division of criminal justice services to develop information on the safe storage of firearms to be provided to parents of school children.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9983
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 1, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by M. of A. EACHUS -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Education
 
 AN  ACT to amend the education law and the executive law, in relation to
  directing that schools provide parents with information  on  the  safe
  storage of firearms
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 115 to
 read as follows:
  ยง 115. INFORMATION ON THE SAFE STORAGE OF  FIREARMS.  THE  INFORMATION
 DEVELOPED PURSUANT TO SECTION EIGHT HUNDRED THIRTY-SEVEN-X OF THE EXECU-
 TIVE  LAW  RELATING TO THE SAFE STORAGE OF FIREARMS SHALL BE MADE AVAIL-
 ABLE ON THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE AND SHALL BE PROVIDED TO PARENTS IN ALL
 PUBLIC, NONPUBLIC, AND CHARTER SCHOOLS AT THE BEGINNING OF  EACH  SCHOOL
 YEAR.
  ยง  2.  The  executive  law is amended by adding a new section 837-x to
 read as follows:
  ยง 837-X. SAFE  STORAGE  OF  FIREARMS  INFORMATION.  THE  DIVISION,  IN
 CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, SHALL DEVELOP INFORMATION
 ON  THE  SAFE STORAGE OF FIREARMS PURSUANT TO SECTIONS 265.45 AND 265.50
 OF THE PENAL LAW, WHICH IS TO BE PROVIDED  TO  PARENTS  IN  ALL  PUBLIC,
 NONPUBLIC,  AND  CHARTER SCHOOLS PURSUANT TO SECTION ONE HUNDRED FIFTEEN
 OF THE EDUCATION LAW. THE INFORMATION SHALL BE PROVIDED IN A  CLEAR  AND
 CONCISE  MANNER  AND  TRANSLATED IN THE SIX MOST COMMON LANGUAGES IN THE
 STATE. SUCH INFORMATION SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, AN  EXPLA-
 NATION OF THE CURRENT LAW AND HOW PARENTS CAN OBTAIN MORE INFORMATION.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately; provided that section one
 of  this  act shall take effect on the first of July next succeeding the
 date on which it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04278-01-3