# Amends section 4 of Rule IV of the Assembly Rules, relating to committees

**Bill ID:** E220
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** William A. Barclay
**Status:** Lost
**PDF:** [E220 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/E220)

---

## Full Text

Assembly Resolution No. 220
 
BY: M. of A. Barclay
 
  AMENDING  section  4  of  Rule  IV of the Assembly
  Rules, in relation to public hearings
 
  RESOLVED, That section 4 of Rule IV of the Assembly Rules is amended
to read as follows:
 
  ยง 4. Hearings. a. During each  legislative  session,  chairpersons  of
standing  committees  may  call  public  hearings  to  permit interested
persons, groups or organizations the opportunity to testify orally or in
writing on legislation or other matters  pending  before  such  standing
committee  provided,  however,  that  each  chairperson  shall call such
public hearings upon a petition signed by [a majority] one-third of  the
members  of the committee.  Such testimony if submitted in writing shall
be posted on the Assembly Internet site to the extent practicable.
 
  b. Consistent with the provisions of subdivision d of section  one  of
Rule IV hereof, the chairperson of each standing committee shall call at
least  one  public  hearing  after  the  adoption  of  the  state budget
regarding  the  implementation  and  administration  of  programs  of
departments,  agencies,  divisions,  authorities,  boards,  commissions,
public benefit corporations and other entities within  the  jurisdiction
of such committee. The purpose of such public hearing shall include, but
not  be  limited  to,  the  impact,  if  any, of the state budget on the
implementation and administration of the programs within such  entities'
jurisdiction.
 
  c.  Other public hearings may be called by committee chairpersons with
prior  consent  of  the  Speaker  and  in  accordance  with  procedure
established by law.
 
  d.  Each  chairperson  shall prepare a schedule setting forth the date
and place for hearings and the subject matter to be considered  thereat.
Copies  of  such  schedule shall be made available to the general public
and representatives of the news media at least seven days prior  to  the
date  of  such  hearing  and  filed with the Assembly Public Information
Office.