# Amends Assembly Rule IV relating to committees

**Bill ID:** E221
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** William A. Barclay
**Status:** Lost
**PDF:** [E221 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/E221)

---

## Full Text

Assembly Resolution No. 221
 
BY: M. of A. Barclay
 
  AMENDING  section  7  of  Rule  IV of the Assembly
  rules, in relation to committees
 
  RESOLVED,  That section 7 of Rule  IV  of  the  Assembly  rules  is
amended to read as follows:
 
  ยง  7. Discharge. a. No standing committee shall be discharged from the
consideration of a bill or resolution until after the  printed  bill  or
resolution  has  been  assigned  by the Index Clerk to the committee and
only in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 
  b. A standing committee shall not be discharged from the consideration
of a bill or resolution except when sponsored by  at  least  seventy-six
members  of the House upon motion and by a vote of a majority of all the
members elected to the Assembly. No such motion shall be in order, until
the committee has had sixty days from  the  date  of  referral  to  such
committee  to consider such bill nor shall such motion be in order on or
after the first Tuesday in May except  with  unanimous  consent  of  the
members or in the discretion of the Speaker where proper notice has been
given prior to the first Tuesday in May.
 
  c.  (1)  On any legislative day, not more than one motion to discharge
shall be in order;
 
  (2) A motion to discharge may only be made by the sponsor of the  bill
or  resolution who has timely filed a request for consideration pursuant
to section five of this rule.
 
  d. Each motion to discharge, when timely made, shall be placed on  the
Motion  to  Discharge  Calendar,  which  shall  be  printed  within  two
legislative days. No motion to discharge may be considered by the  House
until  such  motion  has  been  on  such  calendar  for a period of five
calendar legislative days.