# Amends Assembly Rule V, relating to reconvening the Assembly

**Bill ID:** E222
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** William A. Barclay
**Status:** Lost
**PDF:** [E222 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/E222)

---

## Full Text

Assembly Resolution No. 222
 
BY: M. of A. Barclay
 
  AMENDING  section  7  of  Rule  V  of the Assembly
  rules, in relation  to  requiring  the  Assembly  be
  convened upon the submission of a petition signed by
  seventy-six members of the Assembly
 
  RESOLVED,  That section 7 of Rule V of the Assembly rules is amended
to read as follows:
 
  ยง 7. Adjournment. a. When a motion to adjourn is carried, the  members
and  officers  shall  keep  their  seats  and  places  until the Speaker
declares the House adjourned.
 
  b. No motion to adjourn sine die shall be in  order  until  all  bills
transmitted  to  the  Governor shall have been acted upon by him or her,
and in the case of vetoed bills, until such bills have been returned  to
each House for at least three legislative calendar days.
 
  c.  (1)  The  clerk  of  the Assembly, upon the receipt of the written
request of any member or members elected thereto that  the  Assembly  be
convened  and stating the subject matter sought to be acted upon, shall,
within seven calendar days, cause a petition to be served personally on,
or sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, to each member  of
the Assembly at his or her voting address or such other address as he or
she shall have designated therefor in writing.
  (2) (a) Upon timely return to the Speaker of a petition containing the
signatures  of  seventy-six members of the Assembly, the body as a whole
shall be called back to session for consideration of the subject  matter
detailed in the petition.
  (b)  No  signature  of any member upon any petition shall be effective
unless received by the Speaker, at the Capitol, within  twenty-one  days
of the date of service of mailing of such petition on or to such member.
  (3)  No  written  request  seeking  to  convene  the Assembly shall be
considered until at least fourteen days after the last scheduled session
day has passed, as determined by the legislative calendar.  However,  if
session  does occur after the final scheduled calendar day, the fourteen
day period shall be measured from any such later date.