# Amends Assembly Rule I, relating to news media access to the Assembly Chamber

**Bill ID:** E223
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** William A. Barclay
**Status:** Lost
**PDF:** [E223 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/E223)

---

## Full Text

Assembly Resolution No. 223
 
BY: M. of A. Barclay
 
  AMENDING  section  3  of  Rule  I  of the Assembly
  rules, in relation  to  news  media  access  to  the
  Assembly Chamber
 
  RESOLVED,  That section 3 of Rule I of the Assembly rules is amended
to read as follows:
 
  ยง  3. Assembly Chamber, lobbies, rooms and property. a. The use of the
Assembly Chamber, lobbies, rooms and property shall be controlled by the
Speaker. He or she shall direct the  Sergeant-at-Arms  to  perform  such
acts as may be necessary to preserve order.
 
  b.  The  following persons shall be entitled to admission to the floor
of the House during the session thereof:
 
  (1) the Governor and Lieutenant-Governor;
 
  (2) the members and former members of the Assembly and the Senate;
 
  (3) the elected State officers and their deputies;
 
  (4) persons in the exercise of an official duty directly connected  to
the business of the House; and
 
  (5) the representatives of the news media [designated by the Speaker].
 
  c.  No other person shall be admitted to the floor during the session,
except upon the permission of the Speaker or by vote of the  House;  and
persons  so admitted shall be allowed to occupy places only in the seats
in the rear of the Assembly Chamber.  Such permission may be revoked  by
the Speaker, at pleasure, or upon order of the House.
 
  d.  No  person  shall be admitted to the floor of the Assembly Chamber
who is interested in pending or  contemplated  legislation,  or  who  is
employed  by  or receives compensation from any public or private source
for influencing legislation.
 
  e. No person other than a member shall occupy the chair  of  a  member
during the session of the House.
 
  f.  No  person  shall  have access to or be permitted within or by the
Clerk's desk during the session of the House,  except  officers  of  the
House in the discharge of their official duties.
 
  g. The Speaker may, at pleasure, recognize a member for the purpose of
introducing  guests  in  the  chamber.  The  Speaker further may limit
recognition to one member to introduce an individual guest or group  and
such  member shall speak for no more than two minutes for the purpose of
such introduction.