# Commending King David Consistory No. 3 upon the occasion of hosting its Remembrance and Renewal Ceremony on March 21, 2024

**Bill ID:** J1961
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [J1961 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/J1961)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 1961
 
BY: Senator PARKER
 
  COMMENDING  King  David  Consistory No. 3 upon the
  occasion of  hosting  its  Remembrance  and  Renewal
  Ceremony on March 21, 2024
 
  WHEREAS,  It  is the sense of this Legislative Body to recognize and
pay  tribute  to  those  organizations  of  high  purpose  and  worthy
accomplishment whose endeavors have faithfully served the welfare of the
citizens of the State of New York; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Attendant  to  such  concern  and  in full accord with its
long-standing traditions, this  Legislative  Body  is  justly  proud  to
commend  King  David  Consistory  No. 3 upon the occasion of hosting its
Remembrance and Renewal Ceremony on March 21, 2024, at the  Grand  East,
New York, New York; and
 
  WHEREAS,  King  David  Consistory  No.  3 was founded on January 27,
1887, in which letters of patent and perpetual constitution were  issued
by  the  Illustrious  SGC  James  A.  Handy 33rd degree, and given to 12
sublime  princes  of  the  royal  secret  constituting  them  and  their
successor as a Just and Perfect Consistory; and
 
  WHEREAS,  On  this  day,  we  remember  the  brothers  of King David
Consistory No. 3, and the good work and deeds which they  have  done  to
empower  Black  families throughout the local community; this work is of
the noblest kind and the legacy they leave shall be embraced in love and
brotherhood; and
 
  WHEREAS, The success of King David Consistory No.  3  is  in  direct
correlation  to  the  efforts  of  its dedicated leadership and members,
whose  involvement  is,  and  always  has  been,  characterized  by  an
impressive  commitment,  an  unbridled enthusiasm, and an uncompromising
standard of excellence in all endeavors on behalf  of  the  organization
and the community it serves; and
 
  WHEREAS,  It  is  the  custom  of  this  Legislative  Body that when
individuals and organizations of such noble aims and accomplishments are
brought to our attention, they should be celebrated  and  recognized  by
all the citizens of this great Empire State; now, therefore, be it
 
  WHEREAS, This Legislative Body is proudly moved to honor and commend
the  members  of King David Consistory No. 3, past and present, who have
labored so conscientiously to secure and improve the quality of life for
the community it serves; now, therefore, be it
 
  RESOLVED, That this Legislative Body pause in its  deliberations  to
commend  King  David  Consistory  No. 3 upon the occasion of hosting its
Remembrance and Renewal Ceremony on March 21, 2024; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED, That a copy of this  Resolution,  suitably  engrossed,  be
transmitted to King David Consistory No. 3.