# Commending the Eureka Grand Chapter Prince Hall Order Eastern Star, Inc. upon the occasion of hosting its 127th Annual Grand Session on June 3, 2024

**Bill ID:** J1986
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [J1986 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/J1986)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 1986
 
BY: Senator PARKER
 
  COMMENDING  the  Eureka  Grand Chapter Prince Hall
  Order  Eastern  Star,  Inc.  upon  the  occasion  of
  hosting  its  127th  Annual Grand Session on June 3,
  2024
 
  WHEREAS, Religious institutions, and the many spiritual, social, and
educational benefits they confer, play a vital role in  the  development
of the moral fabric of a responsible citizenry; and
 
  WHEREAS,  It  is  the tradition of this State and this Nation to pay
tribute to those institutions and individuals who  have  contributed  to
the ethical and spiritual values of their communities; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Attendant  to  such  concern  and  in full accord with its
long-standing traditions, this  Legislative  Body  is  justly  proud  to
commend  the  Eureka  Grand Chapter Prince Hall Order Eastern Star, Inc.
upon the occasion of hosting its 127th Annual Grand Session  on  Monday,
June  3,  2024,  at  the  Marriott Melville Long Island in Melville, New
York; and
 
  WHEREAS, The Order of Eastern Star was founded on December 1,  1874,
by  Dr.  Robert  Morris  in  obedience  to the authority granted by Most
Worshipful William H. Myers, Grand  Master,  of  the  then  Union  Grand
Lodge,  Jurisdiction  of  the  District of Columbia; Past Master Jackson
established Queen Esther Chapter No. 1; and
 
  WHEREAS,  The  Order  of  Eastern  Star  is  an  adoptive  rite  of
Freemasonry  with  teachings based on the Bible and whose objectives are
charitable and benevolent; and
 
  WHEREAS, The success of  Eureka  Grand  Chapter  Prince  Hall  Order
Eastern  Star,  Inc.  is  in  direct  correlation  to the efforts of its
dedicated Grand Worthy Matrons and Patrons, whose  involvement  is,  and
always has been, characterized by an impressive commitment, an unbridled
enthusiasm,  and  an  uncompromising  standard  of  excellence  in  all
endeavors on behalf of the organization and the community it serves; and
 
  WHEREAS, This Legislative Body is proudly moved to honor and commend
the members of the Eureka Grand Chapter Prince Hall Order Eastern  Star,
Inc.,  past  and  present, who have labored so conscientiously to secure
and improve the quality of life for the community it serves; now, there-
fore, be it
 
  RESOLVED, That this Legislative Body pause in its  deliberations  to
commend  the  Eureka  Grand Chapter Prince Hall Order Eastern Star, Inc.
upon the occasion of hosting its 127th Annual Grand Session on  June  3,
2024; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED,  That  a  copy  of this Resolution, suitably engrossed, be
transmitted to Eureka Grand Chapter Prince Hall Order Eastern Star, Inc.