# Commending Abu Bekr Temple No. 91 Oasis of Brooklyn Desert of New York upon the occasion of hosting its Annual Potentates Ball

**Bill ID:** J2036
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [J2036 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/J2036)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 2036
 
BY: Senator PARKER
 
  COMMENDING  Abu  Bekr  Temple  No.  91  Oasis  of
  Brooklyn Desert of New York  upon  the  occasion  of
  hosting its Annual Potentates Ball
 
  WHEREAS,  It is the sense of this Legislative Body to recognize that
the quality and character of life in the  communities  across  New  York
State  are  reflective  of  the concerned and dedicated efforts of those
organizations and individuals who would devote themselves to the welfare
of the community and its citizenry; and
 
  WHEREAS, Attendant to such concern, and  in  full  accord  with  its
long-standing  traditions,  this  Legislative  Body  is  justly proud to
commend Abu Bekr Temple No. 91 Oasis of Brooklyn Desert of New York upon
the occasion of hosting its Annual Potentates Ball,  honoring  Kevin  O.
Manley at the Sonesta in White Plains, New York from March 31 - April 2,
2024; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Abu  Bekr  Temple  No. 91 Oasis of Brooklyn, Desert of New
York was chartered August 20,  1949,  and  resides  at  70  Pennsylvania
Avenue Brooklyn, New York; the temple was incorporated in 1975; and
 
  WHEREAS, The Annual Potentates Ball is an event to honor the current
Illustrious  Potentate and the members of Abu Bekr Temple No. 91 for all
the  charity  work  done  throughout  the  year,  ranging  from  voter
registration  programs  to  their  back-to-school  program  to community
feeding initiatives, among many other endeavors; and
 
  WHEREAS, In 1972, Past Potentate John W. Edgehill of Abu Bekr Temple
No.  91 served as the Imperial Potentate of the Ancient Egyptian  Arabic
Nobles  of  the  Mystic  Shrine  of  North  and  South  America  and its
Jurisdiction's, Inc.; and
 
  WHEREAS, Temple units such as the Temple Mounted Unit and the Temple
Marching Unit, while attending the various Imperial Sessions around  the
Nation for the past 25 years have won many awards, the most recent being
First  Place  in  2022  while  attending  Imperial  Session in St. Louis
Missouri; and
 
  WHEREAS, It is  the  custom  of  this  Legislative  Body  that  when
individuals  and institutions of such noble aims and accomplishments are
brought to our attention, they should be celebrated  and  recognized  by
all the citizens of this great Empire State; now, therefore, be it
 
  RESOLVED,  That  this Legislative Body pause in its deliberations to
commend Abu Bekr Temple No. 91 Oasis of Brooklyn Desert of New York upon
the occasion of hosting its Annual Potentates Ball; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED, That copies of this  Resolution,  suitably  engrossed,  be
transmitted  to  Illustrious  Potentate Kevin O. Manley and the Abu Bekr
Temple.