# Commending the Doric Lodge No. 53 Men of Distinction upon the occasion of hosting their Night of Elegance Spring Dinner Dance

**Bill ID:** J2060
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [J2060 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/J2060)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 2060
 
BY: Senator PARKER
 
  COMMENDING  the  Doric  Lodge  No.  53  Men  of
  Distinction upon the occasion of hosting their Night
  of Elegance Spring Dinner Dance
 
  WHEREAS, It is the sense of this Legislative Body to  recognize  and
pay  tribute  to  those  organizations  of  high  purpose  and  worthy
accomplishment whose endeavors have faithfully served the welfare of the
citizens of the State of New York; and
 
  WHEREAS, Attendant to such concern, and  in  full  accord  with  its
long-standing  traditions,  this  Legislative  Body  is  justly proud to
commend the Doric Lodge No. 53 Men of Distinction upon the  occasion  of
hosting  their  Night of Elegance Spring Dinner Dance on Saturday, April
20, 2024, at the Floral Terrace in in Floral Park, New York; and
 
  WHEREAS, The dedicated Masons of New York  are  men  with  a  social
conscience  and  a  charitable  perspective,  who  are  also  known  as
Freemasons; they are part of a fraternal organization that shares common
moral ideals and esoteric values which are  based  on  the  doctrine  of
Brotherly Love, Relief and Truth; and
 
  WHEREAS,  The  Doric  Lodge  No.53 Men of Distinction Spring Charity
Dinner is led by Worshipful Master Walter L.  Whaley  III,  through  the
Most  Worshipful Gregory R. Smith Jr. Grand Master; this most benevolent
event marks the beginning of their spring fundraising  in  the  name  of
excellent charitable works; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Doric  Lodge  No.  53 Men of Distinction have continued to
show their efforts with  their  most  honorable  deeds  and  efforts  to
positively  impact  their community and continue to show their desire to
improve the places they live and worship for all; and
 
  WHEREAS, Doric Lodge No. 53 exemplifies what it means to uphold  the
original  mandate  of  this  most esteemed organization, holding true to
their duties as free and accepted masons; and
 
  WHEREAS, The success of The Doric Lodge No.53 Men of Distinction  is
in  direct  correlation to the efforts of its members, whose involvement
is, and always has been, characterized by an impressive  commitment,  an
unbridled  enthusiasm,  and  an uncompromising standard of excellence in
all endeavors on behalf of the organization and the community it serves;
now, therefore, be it
 
  RESOLVED, That this Legislative Body pause in its  deliberations  to
commend  the  Doric Lodge No. 53 Men of Distinction upon the occasion of
hosting their Night of Elegance Spring Dinner Dance; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED, That a copy of this  Resolution,  suitably  engrossed,  be
transmitted to The Doric Lodge No.53 Men of Distinction.