# Commending Xenia Lodge No. 50 upon the occasion of hosting its Annual Widow's Breakfast on April 21, 2024

**Bill ID:** J2227
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [J2227 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/J2227)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 2227
 
BY: Senator PARKER
 
  COMMENDING Xenia Lodge No. 50 upon the occasion of
  hosting  its  Annual  Widow's Breakfast on April 21,
  2024
 
  WHEREAS, It is the sense of this Legislative Body to  recognize  and
pay  tribute  to  those  organizations  of  high  purpose  and  worthy
accomplishment whose endeavors have faithfully served the welfare of the
citizens of the State of New York; and
 
  WHEREAS, Attendant to such concern, and  in  full  accord  with  its
long-standing  traditions,  this  Legislative  Body  is  justly proud to
commend Xenia Lodge No. 50 upon  the  occasion  of  hosting  its  Annual
Widow's  Breakfast  on  Sunday,  April 21, at the Remington Boys & Girls
Club on 1 Remington Place, New Rochelle, New York; and
 
  WHEREAS, The Widows Breakfast was established to give tribute to the
widows of the members of Xenia Lodge No. 50 and has remained a staple as
an annual event focused not only on remembrance, but on giving thanks to
those who have passed on, and relaying respect to their beloved partners
who supported them in their journey and good community works; and
 
  WHEREAS, Under the leadership of the Worshipful Master Greg  Marable
and  the  Most Worshipful Gregory R. Smith Jr. Grand Master, Xenia Lodge
No.  50  is  well  known  for  its  commitment  to  the  principles  of
freemasonry;  these  principles compel them to support charitable works,
while also maintaining integrity and honesty in their communities; and
 
  WHEREAS, Xenia Lodge No. 50's belief in God, family,  and  community
are  core  values  of  their organization and are near and dear to every
member's heart; and
 
  WHEREAS, The success of Xenia Lodge No. 50 is in direct  correlation
to  the efforts of its leadership and its members, whose involvement is,
and always has been,  characterized  by  an  impressive  commitment,  an
unbridled  enthusiasm,  and  an uncompromising standard of excellence in
all endeavors on behalf of the organization and the community it serves;
and
 
  WHEREAS, This Legislative Body is proudly moved to honor and commend
the members of Xenia Lodge No. 50, Free and Accepted  Masons,  past  and
present,  who  have labored so conscientiously to secure and improve the
quality of life for the community it serves; now, therefore, be it
 
  RESOLVED, That this Legislative Body pause in its  deliberations  to
commend  Xenia  Lodge  No.  50  upon  the occasion of hosting its Annual
Widow's Breakfast on April 21, 2024; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED, That a copy of this  Resolution,  suitably  engrossed,  be
transmitted to Xenia Lodge No. 50.