# Commemorating the 53rd Anniversary of the Al Tabari Court No. 28 Illustrious Commandress Charity Ball, August 2-3, 2024

**Bill ID:** J2337
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [J2337 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/J2337)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 2337
 
BY: Senator PARKER
 
  COMMEMORATING  the  53rd  Anniversary  of  the  Al
  Tabari Court No. 28 Illustrious Commandress  Charity
  Ball, August 2-3, 2024
 
  WHEREAS,  It is the sense of this Legislative Body to recognize that
the quality and character of life in the  communities  across  New  York
State  are  reflective  of  the concerned and dedicated efforts of those
organizations and individuals who would devote themselves to the welfare
of the community and its citizenry; and
 
  WHEREAS, Attendant to such concern, and  in  full  accord  with  its
long-standing  traditions,  this  Legislative  Body  is  justly proud to
commemorate  the  53rd  Anniversary  of  the  Al  Tabari  Court  No.  28
Illustrious  Commandress  Charity Ball, Friday and Saturday, August 2-3,
2024, at the Hilton Hotel in Albany, New York; and
 
  WHEREAS, This year's Illustrious  Commandress  Charity  Ball  honors
Illustrious  Commandress Dt. Tawonna Williams-Holbrook for her dedicated
and faithful efforts in all her undertakings and accomplishments in  the
name of the Al Tabari Court No. 28; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Members of the Al Tabari Court No. 28 have shown that they
not only have the desire to do honorable work in the community, but  the
long-standing  wherewithal  to  continue  to  persevere  in  the name of
community-based excellence; and
 
  WHEREAS, This Legislative Body recognizes the  hard  work,  efforts,
and  resilience that is shown in all this esteemed court does, including
uplifting all those around them through their acts of kindness; and
 
  WHEREAS, The success of the Al Tabari Court No. 28  is  in  direct
correlation  to  the  efforts  of its members, whose involvement is, and
always has been, characterized by an impressive commitment, an unbridled
enthusiasm,  and  an  uncompromising  standard  of  excellence  in  all
endeavors on behalf of the organization and the community it serves; and
 
  WHEREAS,  It  is  the  custom  of  this  Legislative  Body that when
individuals and institutions of such noble aims and accomplishments  are
brought  to  our  attention, they should be celebrated and recognized by
all the citizens of this great Empire State; now, therefore, be it
 
  RESOLVED, That this Legislative Body pause in its  deliberations  to
commemorate  the  53rd  Anniversary  of  the  Al  Tabari  Court  No.  28
Illustrious Commandress Charity Ball; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED, That copies of this  Resolution,  suitably  engrossed,  be
transmitted  to  the  Al  Tabari  Court  No.  28,  and  the  Illustrious
Commandress Dt. Tawonna Williams-Holbrook.