# Commending Community Options, Inc. upon the occasion of hosting its Ribbon Cutting Ceremony on June 20, 2024

**Bill ID:** J2493
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [J2493 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/J2493)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 2493
 
BY: Senator PARKER
 
  COMMENDING  Community  Options,  Inc.  upon  the
  occasion of hosting its Ribbon Cutting  Ceremony  on
  June 20, 2024
 
  WHEREAS,  Individuals  and  organizations  devoted  to improving the
quality of life for others, enabling them to build lives of dignity  and
self-worth are deserving of the highest praise and recognition; and
 
  WHEREAS, From time to time, society calls upon these individuals and
organizations  to  be  recognized  for  the  significance  of  their
contributions and efforts to assist  others  in  developing  the  skills
necessary to be successful, productive citizens; and
 
  WHEREAS,  This Legislative Body is justly proud to commend Community
Options, Inc. upon the occasion of hosting its Ribbon  Cutting  Ceremony
on  Thursday,  June  20, 2024 at 1366 East 59th Street, in Brooklyn, New
York; and
 
  WHEREAS, Incorporated on February 9, 1989, Community Options, Inc.'s
mission is to develop residential and employment support for people with
severe disabilities; and
 
  WHEREAS, Since its  inception,  Community  Options,  Inc.  has  been
devoted  to  serving  individuals  with  intellectual  and developmental
disabilities, thus cultivating a reputation  for  providing  exceptional
person-centered services that are unique to each individuals' needs; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Community  Options,  Inc.  established  a  new location in
Brooklyn and is devoted to  caring  for  and  supporting  those  who  go
through  life  with a developmental disability; their goal is to inspire
people to reach their highest degree of self-determination and to strive
for freedom and dignity; and
 
  WHEREAS, It  is  the  sense  of  this  Legislative  Body  that  when
organizations  of such noble aims and accomplishments are brought to our
attention, they should be celebrated and recognized by all the  citizens
of this great Empire State; now, therefore, be it
 
  RESOLVED,  That  this Legislative Body pause in its deliberations to
commend Community Options, Inc. upon the occasion of hosting its  Ribbon
Cutting Ceremony on June 20, 2024; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED,  That  a  copy  of this Resolution, suitably engrossed, be
transmitted to Community Options, Inc.