# Commending Medina Court No. 11 upon the occasion of hosting its Annual Commandress Ball on May 25, 2024

**Bill ID:** J2562
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [J2562 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/J2562)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 2562
 
BY: Senator PARKER
 
  COMMENDING  Medina  Court No. 11 upon the occasion
  of hosting its Annual Commandress Ball  on  May  25,
  2024
 
  WHEREAS,  It is the sense of this Legislative Body to recognize that
the quality and character of life in the  communities  across  New  York
State  are  reflective  of  the concerned and dedicated efforts of those
organizations and individuals who devote themselves to  the  welfare  of
the community and its citizenry; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Attendant  to  such  concern,  and in full accord with its
long-standing traditions, this  Legislative  Body  is  justly  proud  to
commend  Medina  Court  No.  11  upon the occasion of hosting its Annual
Commandress Ball on May 25, 2024, at the LaGuardia Plaza Hotel  in  East
Elmhurst, New York; and
 
  WHEREAS,  This  year's  Illustrious Commandress Ball honors the 97th
Illustrious Commandress Dt. Ayana Nedd  for  her  excellent  service  to
Medina Court No. 11; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Illustrious  Commandress Dt. Ayana Nedd through her strong
leadership,  steady  teachings,  and  unwavering  love  for  her  court,
community, family, and her fellow sisters, has shown that leadership can
be done with true grace and elegance; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Medina  Court  No. 11 has shown the strong qualities of an
organization rooted in caring commitment, pride for, and service to  its
surrounding community; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Medina  Court No. 11 has shown that they not only have the
desire to do honorable work in  the  community,  but  the  long-standing
wherewithal to persevere in the name of community-based excellence; and
 
  WHEREAS, The success of Medina Court No. 11 is in direct correlation
to  the  efforts  of  its  members, whose involvement is, and always has
been,  characterized  by  an  impressive  commitment,  an  unbridled
enthusiasm,  and  an  uncompromising  standard  of  excellence  in  all
endeavors on behalf of the organization and the community it serves; and
 
  WHEREAS, It is  the  custom  of  this  Legislative  Body  that  when
individuals  and institutions of such noble aims and accomplishments are
brought to our attention, they should be celebrated  and  recognized  by
all the citizens of this great Empire State; now, therefore, be it
 
  RESOLVED,  That  this Legislative Body pause in its deliberations to
commend Medina Court No. 11 upon the  occasion  of  hosting  its  Annual
Commandress Ball on May 25, 2024; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED,  That  copies  of  this Resolution, suitably engrossed, be
transmitted to Medina Court No. 11 and Illustrious Commandress Dt. Ayana
Nedd.