# Commending NewFlex Youth, Inc. upon the occasion of hosting its Annual Winter Purple Ball

**Bill ID:** J453
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [J453 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/J453)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 453
 
BY: Senator PARKER
 
  COMMENDING  NewFlex  Youth, Inc. upon the occasion
  of hosting its Annual Winter Purple Ball
 
  WHEREAS, It is the sense of this Legislative Body to  commend  those
illustrious organizations of the State of New York who have made stellar
efforts on behalf of young people and their futures; and
 
  WHEREAS,  Attendant  to  such  concern,  and in full accord with its
long-standing traditions, this  Legislative  Body  is  justly  proud  to
commend  NewFlex  Youth,  Inc.  upon  the occasion of hosting its Winter
Purple Ball on Saturday, February 25, 2023, in New Rochelle,  New  York;
and
 
  WHEREAS,  NewFlex  Youth,  Inc. is a grassroots organization serving
youth  in  New  York  City  and  Westchester  County;  their  positive
development  program  model  expands  educational, social, recreational,
vocational, and economic opportunities for ethnically diverse youth; and
 
  WHEREAS, Focusing on enriching  the  futures  of  the  participating
members  of  the  organization,  NewFlex Youth, Inc. focuses on personal
responsibility,  healthy  decision-making,  self-confidence,
self-regulation,  and goal setting through interactive sports curriculum
and mentorship, facilitating a healthy  transition  into  healthy  young
adulthood; and
 
  WHEREAS,  The  Annual  Winter Purple Ball is a fundraiser to support
youth programs and fund scholarships; and
 
  WHEREAS, The Purple Ball was founded on Black  History  legacies  to
commemorate  and  acknowledge  Black  leaders  in  New  York  City  and
Westchester County; the night of fun and camaraderie allows attendees to
mingle with individuals in the philanthropic sector, community  members,
stakeholders, and former students of the NewFlex community; and
 
  WHEREAS,  It  is  the  custom  of  this  Legislative  Body that when
organizations of such noble aims and accomplishments are brought to  our
attention,  they should be celebrated and recognized by all the citizens
of this great Empire State; now, therefore, be it
 
  RESOLVED, That this Legislative Body pause in its  deliberations  to
commend  NewFlex  Youth,  Inc.  upon  the occasion of hosting its Annual
Winter Purple Ball; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED, That a copy of this  Resolution,  suitably  engrossed,  be
transmitted to NewFlex Youth, Inc.