# Memorializing Governor Kathy Hochul to proclaim February 7, 2024, as St. Vincent Flag Day in the State of New York

**Bill ID:** K1066
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Brian Cunningham
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [K1066 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/K1066)

---

## Full Text

Assembly Resolution No. 1066
 
BY: M. of A. Cunningham
 
  MEMORIALIZING  Governor  Kathy  Hochul to proclaim
  February 7, 2024, as St. Vincent  Flag  Day  in  the
  State of New York
 
  WHEREAS,  It  is the sense of this Legislative Body, in keeping with
its time-honored traditions, to  recognize  and  pay  tribute  to  those
official days which are set aside to foster ethnic pride and enhance the
profile  of  cultural  diversity  which  strengthens  the  fabric of the
communities of New York State; and
 
  WHEREAS, Attendant to  such  concern,  it  is  the  intent  of  this
Legislative  Body  to  memorialize  Governor  Kathy  Hochul  to proclaim
February 7, 2024, as St. Vincent Flag Day in the State of New York; and
 
  WHEREAS, St. Vincent Flag Day celebrates the rich culture  of  Saint
Vincent  and  the  Grenadines  and  its  people,  including the history,
language, arts, food, music, and traditions; and
 
  WHEREAS,  The  purpose  of  the  day  is  to  raise  awareness  and
understanding  about  the  Saint  Vincentian  culture,  celebrate  the
independence of Saint Vincent, as well as to  strengthen  the  pride  of
Saint Vincentians and their youth; and
 
  WHEREAS, St. Vincent and the Grenadines gained Independence from the
United  Kingdom  on  October 27, 1979, and adopted their flag on October
22, 1985; the blue represents the sky and sea; the gold is  for  warmth,
the  bright spirit of the people and the golden sands of the Grenadines;
the green represents the lush vegetation of  St.  Vincent's  agriculture
and the enduring vitality of the people; and
 
  WHEREAS, There is a significant Vincentian diaspora in Brooklyn, New
York;  Vincentians have lived in the New York area since the 1900s, some
of whom came to the United States after working on the Panama Canal; and
 
  WHEREAS, Today, there are approximately 14,000 immigrants  from  St.
Vincent and the Grenadines living in New York City; and
 
  WHEREAS,  It  is  the  intent  of  this Legislative Body to urge the
citizens of New York State to join those  from  Saint  Vincent  and  the
Grenadines  as they rejoice in the accomplishments of their ancestors by
memorializing February 7, 2024, as St. Vincent Flag Day; now, therefore,
be it
 
  RESOLVED, That this Legislative Body pause in its  deliberations  to
memorialize  Governor  Kathy Hochul to proclaim February 7, 2024, as St.
Vincent Flag Day in the State of New York; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED, That a copy of this  Resolution,  suitably  engrossed,  be
transmitted  to The Honorable Kathy Hochul, Governor of the State of New
York.