# Memorializing Governor Kathy Hochul to proclaim February 21, 2024, as St. Lucia Flag Day in the State of New York

**Bill ID:** K2210
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Brian Cunningham
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [K2210 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/K2210)

---

## Full Text

Assembly Resolution No. 2210
 
BY: M. of A. Rules (Cunningham)
 
  MEMORIALIZING  Governor  Kathy  Hochul to proclaim
  February 21, 2024, as St.  Lucia  Flag  Day  in  the
  State of New York
 
  WHEREAS,  It  is the sense of this Legislative Body, in keeping with
its time-honored traditions, to  recognize  and  pay  tribute  to  those
official days which are set aside to foster ethnic pride and enhance the
profile  of  cultural  diversity  which  strengthens  the  fabric of the
communities of New York State; and
 
  WHEREAS, Attendant to  such  concern,  it  is  the  intent  of  this
Legislative  Body  to  memorialize  Governor  Kathy  Hochul  to proclaim
February 21, 2024, as St. Lucia Flag Day in the State of New York; and
 
  WHEREAS, St. Lucia Flag Day celebrates the rich culture of St. Lucia
and its people, including the history, language, arts, food, music,  and
traditions; and
 
  WHEREAS,  The  purpose  of  the  day  is  to  raise  awareness  and
understanding about the St. Lucian culture, celebrate  the  independence
of  St.  Lucia,  as  well  as to strengthen the pride of St. Lucians and
their youth; and
 
  WHEREAS, The national flag of St. Lucia  was  adopted  on  March  1,
1967,  upon  achieving  self-government; the blue epitomizes the sky and
the sea,  specifically  the  Atlantic  Ocean  and  Caribbean  Sea  which
encircles  the  country;  the  black  and white allude to the harmonious
relationship between the black and white races;  the  yellow  symbolizes
the sunshine, as well as prosperity; and
 
  WHEREAS,  It  is  the  intent  of  this Legislative Body to urge the
citizens of New York State to join St. Lucians as they  rejoice  in  the
accomplishments  of  their ancestors by memorializing February 21, 2024,
as St. Lucia Flag Day; now, therefore, be it
 
  RESOLVED, That this Legislative Body pause in its  deliberations  to
memorialize  Governor Kathy Hochul to proclaim February 21, 2024, as St.
Lucia Flag Day in the State of New York; and be it further
 
  RESOLVED, That a copy of this  Resolution,  suitably  engrossed,  be
transmitted  to The Honorable Kathy Hochul, Governor of the State of New
York.