# Senate budget resolution in response to the 2024-2025 Executive Budget submission

**Bill ID:** R1952
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrea Stewart-Cousins
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [R1952 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/R1952)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 1952
 
BY: Senator STEWART-COUSINS
 
  RESOLUTION  in  response  to the 2024-2025 Executive
  Budget  submission  (Legislative  Bills  S.8300-A,
  S.8301,  S.8302,  S.8303-A,  S.8304-A,  S.8305-A,
  S.8306-A, S.8307-A, S.8308-A, S.8309) to be  adopted
  as  legislation  expressing  the position of the New
  York State Senate relating to the 2024-2025 New York
  State Budget
 
WHEREAS, It is the intent of  the  Senate  to  effectuate  the  timely
passage of a State Budget; and
 
WHEREAS,  It  is  the  intent  of  the  Senate to engage in the Budget
Conference Committee process, which promotes increased participation  by
the members of the Legislature and the public; and
 
WHEREAS, The Senate Finance Committee has conducted an extensive study
and  review  of the Governor's 2024-2025 Executive Budget submission and
has recommended proposed amendments to such  Budget  submission  in  the
above  referenced  Legislative Bills and Report on the Executive Budget;
and
 
WHEREAS, Article VII of the New York State Constitution  provides  the
framework  under  which  the New York State Budget is submitted, amended
and enacted. The New York State Courts have limited the  Legislature  in
how  it  may  change the appropriations bills submitted by the Governor.
The Legislature can delete or reduce items of appropriation contained in
the several appropriation bills submitted by the Governor in conjunction
with  the  Executive  Budget,  and  it  can  add  additional  items  of
appropriation  to  those  bills  provided that such additions are stated
separately and distinctly from the original items of the bill and  refer
each to a single object or purpose; and
 
WHEREAS,  An  extensive  study  and review of the Governor's 2024-2025
Executive Budget submission has revealed that the  construction  of  the
budget bills submitted to the Legislature by the Governor constrains the
Legislature  in  its  ability to fully effectuate its intent in amending
the Governor's budget submission; and
 
WHEREAS, The Senate has amended  the  Governor's  2024-2025  Executive
Budget  submission  to  the fullest extent possible within the authority
provided to it pursuant to Section 4 of Article  VII  of  the  New  York
State Constitution; and
 
WHEREAS, The Senate, in addition to the Governor's 2024-2025 Executive
Budget submission bills as amended by the Senate in the above referenced
legislative  bills,  does  hereby  provide  its  recommendations  as  to
provisions in the Governor's 2024-2025 Executive Budget submission which
reflect those items the  Senate  is  constrained  from  effectuating  as
amendments to the 2024-2025 Executive Budget appended hereto; and
 
WHEREAS,  It  is the intent of the Senate that upon the passage of the
Governor's 2024-2025 Executive  Budget  submission  as  amended  by  the
 
Senate,  the  incorporated  Report  on  the Amended Executive Budget may
provide a basis for both houses of the Legislature to convene Committees
on Conference pursuant to Joint Rule III of the Senate and Assembly  for
the purpose of reconciling any differences between the amendments to the
Governor's  budget  as  proposed  by each house of the Legislature; now,
therefore, be it
 
RESOLVED, That the above  referenced  Legislative  Bills  be  and  are
incorporated  as  part  of this resolution and are hereby adopted as the
New York State Senate's budget proposal for the 2024-2025 New York State
Budget.
 
REPORT ON THE AMENDED EXECUTIVE BUDGET
 
ALL STATE AGENCIES AND OPERATIONS
 
Adirondack Park Agency
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $6.6 million, which is consistent with SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Aging, Office for the
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $16.6 million, an increase of 3.2 million or 23.6 percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $352
  million, and adds $32  million  for  a  total  of  $384  million  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $15 million for the Expanded In-home Services
  for the Elderly Program (EISEP) and Community Services  for  the
  Elderly Program.
  o The  Senate  adds  $5  million  for Project Guardianship Hotline
  program.
  o The Senate adds $5 million for Aging Legislative Grants.
  o The Senate adds $11.3 million for the Long Term  Care  Ombudsman
  Program (LTCOP), providing a total of $15 million.
  - The  LTCOP  shall  provide  the  necessary oversight to more
  effectively  advocate  for  the  rights  of  Long-term  care
  residents  and  to  reduce  violations  through  advocacy,
  mediation, education and referrals.
  - Long-term care  providers  shall  be  held  accountable  for
  improvement  of  deficiencies  and  shall  maximize  the
  effectiveness of care for residents.
  o The  Senate  adds  $2.4  for  Holocaust  Survivor  Initiative,
  providing a total of $3.4 million.
  o The  Senate  adds  $1 million for Naturally Occurring Retirement
  Community (NORC) Neighborhood NORC Programs, providing  a  total
  of $9.1 million.
  o The  Senate  adds  $1  million  to  support  the modification of
  Article VII HMH Part W, supporting the  Interagency  Council  of
  Elder Justice.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8307-B)
 
  * PART  F -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal regarding long
  term care facilities. The Senate modifies the proposal to remove the
  residency requirement and to provide  additional  vouchers  for  the
  Special Needs Assisted Living Residence (SNALR) voucher program. The
  Senate  further  modifies  the Executive proposal requiring assisted
  living residences to report to the Department of Health  on  quality
  measures which the Department will use to grant an advanced standing
  classification  by  omitting  the  provisions  related  to  modified
  inspection  schedules  for  facilities  with  advanced  standing
  classification  or  that  obtain  accreditation  from  a  nationally
  recognized accreditor.
  * PART W -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal  to  create  an
  interagency  elder justice coordinating council by replacing it with
  a task force that expands  stakeholder  participation  and  requires
  legislative representation.
  * NEW  PART  YY  -- The Senate advances language to raise the Personal
  Needs Allowance for certain individuals  who  reside  in  a  nursing
  home,  residential  health  care,  or  intermediate  care  facility
  (S.7786).
 
Agriculture and Markets, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $185 million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive recommendation of $68.9 million
  and adds $13.1 million, for a total of $82 million, as follows:
  o The Senate restores $5.3 million for the following:
  - $1 million for Cornell to study the  ecological  impacts  of
  agrivoltaics.
  - $1 million for beginning farmers.
  - $1  million  for  socially  and  economically  disadvantaged
  farmers.
  - $481,000 for the Cornell Vet Diagnostic Lab.
  - $300,000 for Cornell hops breeding research.
  - $250,000 for the pro-dairy climate specialist.
  - $250,000 for the Cornell livestock systems team.
  - $199,000 for the Cornell farm labor specialist.
  - $150,000 for the Wine and Grape Foundation.
  - $100,000 for the John May farm safety fund.
  - $100,000 for Black Farmers United.
  - $100,000  for  the  Cornell  Cooperative  Extension
  upstate-downstate food network divide.
  - $75,000 for the Maple Producers Association.
  - $50,000 for Cornell Geneva barley experimentation.
  - $50,000 for the Hop Growers of New York.
  - $50,000 for Cornell concord grape research.
  - $49,000 for corn and soybean growers.
  - $20,000 for Cornell onion research.
  - $24,000 for the Cider Association.
  - $24,000 for the Brewers Association.
  - $24,000 for the Distillers Guild.
  o The  Senate  provides  $8  million in additional funding for the
  following:
  - $4.1 million for the Farm Viability Institute.
  - $1.5 million for the Apple Growers Association.
 
  - $850,000 for the Farmland for a New Generation program.
  - $750,000 for Grow NYC.
  - $250,000 for the Northeast Organic Farmers Association.
  - $200,000 for the Turfgrass Environmental Stewardship Fund.
  - $199,000 for Cornell vegetable research.
  - $124,000 for Cornell maple research.
  - $100,000 for the Cannabis Farmers Alliance.
  o The Senate adds $128 million for the following:
  - $60 million for Cannabis farmer loans.
  - $40 million for Cannabis farmer grants.
  - $28 million for Cannabis farmer tax credits.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive recommendation of $70.6 million
  and adds $5 million, for a total of $75.6 million, as follows:
  o The Senate adds $5 million for Cornell hemp processing.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * PART R -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal  to  change  the
  codified  weighmaster  license  fee  of  $15 to be commensurate with
  costs as determined by the Department  of  Agriculture  and  Markets
  through regulation.
  * PART UU -- The Senate advances language to expand the eligibility of
  the  Farm to School Reimbursement program (amended version of S.423)
  and ensure the Reimbursement  program  is  compatible  with  schools
  attaining  reimbursement through the Community Eligibility Provision
  (S.8378).
  * PART HHH -- The Senate advances language to assist cannabis  farmers
  whose  crops  were  impacted  by  the  delayed implementation of the
  cannabis program in the following ways:
  o Establishing a cannabis farmer rescue and relief fund.
  o Establishing a cannabis farmer loan program.
  o Establishing a cannabis farmer refundable tax credit.
 
Alcoholic Beverage Control, Division of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate accepts the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $79.7
  million,  and  adds  $4.9  million  for  a total of $84.6 million as
  follows:
  o The Senate adds $4.9 million for staff to address the  licensing
  backlog.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All Funds recommendation of $5
  million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * PART  G  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to combat the
  unlicensed sale of cannabis by adding language that would strengthen
  the ability of enforcement agencies to take actions against property
  owners allowing illicit cannabis stores on their property,  make  it
  easier  for local governments to utilize the process to seek closing
  orders against illicit  stores  in  the  courts,  expand  the  hours
  administrative  inspections  can happen, and makes technical changes
  to the proposal to give localities the ability to create  their  own
  administrative cannabis enforcement local laws.
 
  * PART  H  --  The  Senate  modifies  the  Executive proposal to enact
  several of the ABC Law Commission recommendations by adding language
  recommended by the Commission to allow for locations subject to  the
  500-foot  rule  to  obtain temporary retail permits in New York City
  even  if  it has not been the site of a licensed retailer within the
  previous two years and to allow bars and restaurants to make limited
  purchases from liquor stores of up to 12 individual bottles.
  * PART I -- The Senate accepts the Executive  proposal  to  allow  for
  temporary  wholesale  permits  and  multiple wholesale licenses at a
  single location.
  * PART J -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal  to  permanently
  extend  the  sole  administrative  authority of the Chair of the SLA
  Board.
  * PART K -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  extend  the
  authorization for temporary retail permits for one year to make it a
  permanent extension.
  * PART  L  --  The  Senate  accepts the Executive proposal to set up a
  statutory  framework  to  allow  for  Noncontiguous/Outdoor  Cafes
  Licensing,  including  providing  signage for customers in instances
  where the space is intersected by a bicycle lane.
  * PART Y -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  permanently  extend  the  authorization for on-premises licensees to
  sell and deliver wine and liquor beverages for delivery and takeout,
  which does not expire until 2025.
  * NEW PART DD -- The Senate advances language to allow movie  theaters
  to be licensed to sell liquor (S.7389).
  * NEW  PART EE -- The Senate advances language to allow for the direct
  intrastate and interstate shipment of cider (S.1999).
 
Addiction Services and Supports, Office of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $171.4  million, a decrease of $7.8 million, or 4.4 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $922.3
  million by adding $67.9 million for  a  total  of  $990  million  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $45  million to support the Opioid Settlement
  Fund with appropriation language to support programs recommended
  by the Opioid Advisory Board.
  o The Senate adds $11.4 million for  Problem  Gambling,  Substance
  Use  Disorder  Outpatient, Harm Reduction, and Treatment Support
  Services.
  o The Senate adds $5 million for Cannabis Youth Education programs
  and services.
  o The Senate adds $5 million for Addiction Services  and  Supports
  Legislative Grants.
  o The  Senate  adds  $1.5 million for Addiction Treatment Programs
  for REACH project and Samaritan Daytop Village.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $92 million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8305-B)
 
  * NEW  PART  ZZ  --  The Senate advances certain provisions that would
  direct the Office of Addiction Services  and  Supports  to  contract
  with  a  vendor  to  establish  a  drug-checking  services  program
  (S.4880-B).
 
Audit and Control, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $563.5 million, an increase of $8.8 million or 1.6 percent from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $0, a decrease of $2.8 million from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Budget, Division of the
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate accepts the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $50.2
  million and adds $602,000 for a total of $50.8 million as follows:
  o The  Senate restores $602,000 for membership dues to the Council
  of State  Governments,  the  National  Conference  of  Insurance
  Legislators, and the National Conference of State Legislatures.
 
Children and Family Services, Office of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $587 million, an increase of $30.9 million or 5.6 percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $4.9
  billion, and adds $297 million  for  a  total  of  $5.3  billion  as
  follows:
  o The Senate restores $33.9 million for the following:
  - $10 million for the Youth Sports Grant Program.
  - $5 million in additional support for Child Advocacy Centers,
  for a total of $10.2 million.
  - $3  million  in additional support for the Youth Development
  Program (YDP), for a total of $17.1 million.
  - $2.1 million for the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act,  for  a
  total of $8.6 million.
  - $1.9  million  in  additional  support  for the Kinship Care
  Program, for a total of $2.2 million.
  - $5 million for the Facilitated Enrollment Pilot Program  for
  episodic  workers and undocumented up to 400% FPL - New York
  City.
  - $5 million for the Facilitated Enrollment Pilot Program  for
  episodic  workers  and undocumented up to 400% FPL - Rest of
  State.
  - $1.25 million for  the  Child  Care  Facilitated  Enrollment
  program for families earning up to 85% SMI - New York City.
  - $600,000  for  the Child Care Facilitated Enrollment program
  for families earning up to 85% SMI - Rest of State.
  o The Senate adds $43.15 million for the following:
 
  - $10 million for Fostering Youth Success Alliance  -  College
  initiative.
  - $5  million  in additional support for Afterschool programs,
  for a total of $105.7 million.
  - $5 million for the Settlement House Program.
  - $1.25 million for NYS Alliance of Boys  and  Girls  Clubs  -
  Nutrition Initiative.
  - $1 million for New York State YMCA Foundation.
  - $850,000 for Hispanic Federation.
  - $50,000 for Grandpas United.
  - $20 million to support legislative initiatives.
  o Child Care
  - $220  million in additional support for the establishment of
  a permanent Workforce Retention Grant program, for  a  total
  of  $500  million.  Funds  will provide child care employees
  with an annual salary enhancement.
  - $12  million  carveout  from  NYC  Child  Care  Block  Grant
  allocation  for  the  facilitated  enrollment  program  for
  families earning up to 85% SMI.
  - $5 million carveout for Network for Youth Success  from  the
  Child Care Block Grant.
  o The  Senate modifies language for the $900 million appropriation
  for Child Welfare Services to increase the  State  reimbursement
  rate from 62 percent to 65 percent.
  *  The  Senate  is  interested  in  exploring  pathways  to  achieving
  universal coverage for afterschool programming.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $60.2  million,  an  increase  of  $78,000  or 0.13 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8306-B)
  * PART G -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  extend  the
  current  reimbursement  structure  for  residential  placements  of
  children with special needs outside of New York for a period of  one
  year.
  * NEW  PART  FF  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  establish
  differential payment rates from ten to  fifteen  percent  for  child
  care  providers  who  provide  care  to  children  experiencing
  homelessness, who provide care during nontraditional hours,  or  who
  provide  care  in  circumstances  deemed  appropriate  by  the local
  district (amended version of S.4079).
  * NEW  PART  DD  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  amend  the
  requirements  related to the eligibility of child care assistance to
  provide that applicants who meet the eligibility criteria for  child
  care assistance via the block grant for child care shall be eligible
  for  a full-time child care slot regardless of the hours the child's
  caretaker is working or the reason the caretaker requires child care
  (S.8152).
  * NEW PART UU -- The Senate  advances  language  to  amend  the  state
  finance  law  regarding  access  to  funding  for  Raise  the  Age
  programming in cities with a population of five million or more.
 
City University of New York (CUNY)
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
 
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $3.3
  billion,  and  adds  $70  million,  for  a  total of $3.3 billion as
  follows:
  o The Senate restores $2.6 million in funding for the following:
  - $1.1 million for CUNY SEEK
  - $1 million for Increasing Access to Mental Health Services
  - $500,000 for the Black Male Initiative
  o The Senate adds $79.3 million in funding for the following:
  - $67 million in operational funding
  - $6 million for the CUNY Medical School
  - $3.3 million for the Murphy School of Labor
  - $2 million for Asian American/Asian Research Institute
  - $1 million for the CUNY Midwifery Program
  * The  Senate supports additional funding if needed to fund collective
  bargaining agreements.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive's All Funds recommendation of $1.8
  billion and adds $1.4  million  for  a  total  of  $1.4  billion  as
  follows:
  o The Senate restores $1.4 million in funding for the following:
  - $1  million  for  Medgar  Evers environmental and energy job
  training and development.
  - $350,000 for the Haywood Burns Chair/CUNY School of Law.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive's All Funds recommendation of $441
  million and adds $686  million  for  a  total  of  $1.1  billion  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  restores  $535 million in funding to support Senior
  College capital projects.
  o The Senate adds $151 million in funding for the following:
  - $150 million for Hostos Community College Capital.
  - $350,000 for Laguardia Community  College  lighting  upgrade
  for the main stage.
  - $200,000 for Bronx Community College Nursing School.
 
Civil Service, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  an  All  Funds  recommendation  of $97.8
  million, an increase of  $12.5  million  or  15  percent,  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs with an All Funds recommendation of $2 million,
  unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * PART Q -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to eliminate the
  Lag Payroll and the Salary Withholding Program for newly hired State
  employees.
  * PART S -- The Senate rejects the  Executive  proposal  to  eliminate
  reimbursement  of  the  Medicare  Income  Related Monthly Adjustment
  Amounts to public retirees and their  dependents  in  the  New  York
  State Health Insurance Program.
  * PART  T -- The Senate rejects the Executive proposal to require that
  any corporation, district, agency, or organization participating  in
 
  the  NYSHIP  plan  be required to pay interest for any late payment,
  and to allow the Director of the Budget to intercept any funds  paid
  by  the  State  and  direct such funds to the state health insurance
  fund.
  * NEW  PART  JJ  --  The  Senate advances language to reduce the final
  average salary calculation window for Tier 6 members  from  five  to
  three years (S.8490).
  * NEW  PART SS -- The Senate advances language to extend the provision
  to exclude overtime from Tier 6 pension contribution calculations to
  March 31, 2026. This provision is scheduled to sunset on  March  31,
  2024.
  * NEW  PART  UU  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  establish  a
  twenty-year retirement plan  for  members  of  the  New  York  State
  University  Police,  the  New  York State Environmental Conservation
  Police, the New York State Park  Police,  and  the  New  York  State
  Forest Rangers (S.8472).
  * NEW PART II -- The Senate advances language to modify the in-service
  death  benefit  for  retirement eligible state correctional officers
  employed at the Department of Corrections and Community  Supervision
  (DOCCS)  and  security hospital treatment assistants employed by the
  Office of Mental Health (OMH) (S.8408).
  * NEW  PART  MM  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  extend  the
  presumption  that  any  disability  or  death  resulting  from heart
  disease was incurred in the performance and discharge of  duties  to
  university  police officers appointed by the State University of New
  York (S.7519 - 2023).
  * NEW PART NN -- The Senate advances language to allow  Tier  6  peace
  and  court  officers  employed  by  the court system to retire after
  thirty years of service at age fifty-five without seeing a reduction
  in benefits, and to reduce the normal retirement age for this  class
  of employees from sixty-three to sixty-two and lessen the reductions
  in  benefits  for  those  who  retire prior to normal retirement age
  (S.5653 - 2023).
  * NEW PART TT -- The Senate advances language to allow police officers
  in  the  NYC  Department  of  Environmental  Protection  who  have
  transferred  or  will  transfer  from  the  New  York City Employees
  Retirement System (NYCERS) to the  New  York  State  Police  &  Fire
  Retirement  System  (NYSPFRS)  to  transfer service credit earned in
  NYCERS towards their membership in the NYSPFRS (S.6536 - 2023).
  * NEW  PART  OO  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  establish  a
  twenty-five  year  retirement plan for New York City Fire Protection
  Inspectors (amended version of S.7127).
  * NEW PART PP -- The Senate advances language to increase the  current
  earnings  limitation  for public service retirees who return to work
  for the State from $35,000 to $50,000.
  * NEW PART QQ -- The Senate advances language to  extend  the  retiree
  earnings limitation waiver for retirees who return to work as school
  employees  for  one  year.  This provision is scheduled to sunset on
  June 30, 2024.
 
Commission of Correction, State
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All Funds recommendation of $4
  million, an increase of $30,000 or less than one  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Corrections and Community Supervision, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the  Executive All Funds recommendation of $3
  billion, and adds appropriation language as follows:
  o The  Senate  modifies  appropriation  language  to  require  the
  Department of Corrections and Community Supervision to report to
  the  Legislature  on  the  status of the Humane Alternatives for
  Long-Term (HALT)  Confinement  Act  implementation  and  use  of
  funding.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive All Funds recommendation of $39
  million and adds $1.6 million  for  a  total  of  $40.6  million  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $1.6 million to support New PPGG Article VII,
  which reestablishes a DOCCS visitor transportation  program  for
  families  visiting  people  in  State correctional facilities as
  proposed in S.1578.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $563
  million, as follows:
  o The  Senate  modifies  appropriation  language  to  require  the
  Department of Corrections and Community Supervision to provide a
  report to the Legislature on the status of all capital  projects
  and  annual  costs  for  existing  correctional  facilities
  maintenance and upgrades.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * PART D -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to close up  to
  five correctional facilities by increasing the 90-day advance notice
  to 180 days and requiring the Executive to provide information about
  staff  placement  and relocation in the advanced 180-day notice. The
  Senate also supports utilizing the savings from these  closures  for
  various  programs  and  services  including,  Alternatives  to
  Incarceration Programs, free transportation services to correctional
  facilities, and any  additional  support  services  to  incarcerated
  individuals and/or formerly incarcerated individuals.
  * NEW  PART  AAA  --  The  Senate  advances language that requires the
  Department of  Corrections  and  Community  Supervision  to  provide
  transportation  for  visitors  to correctional facilities across the
  state on a regular basis (S.1578).
  * NEW PART DDD  --  The  Senate  advances  language  that  aligns  the
  definition  of Serious Mental Illness in the Correction Law with the
  Serious  Mental  Illness  definition  in  the  Mental  Hygiene  Law
  (S.4621).
 
Council on the Arts
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All Funds recommendation of $6
  million, an increase of $693,000 or 13.2 percent from SFY 2023-24.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive All Funds recommendation of $44
  million, and adds $68  million  for  a  total  of  $112  million  as
  follows:
  o The Senate restores $49 million in funding for the following:
  - $40 million in general operating grants.
 
  - $8 million for Regional Arts Councils.
  - $1  million  for  small  and  medium-sized  organization
  stabilization grants.
  o The Senate adds $19 million in funding for the following:
  - $10 million for operating  funding  to  be  distributed  via
  resolution.
  - $9 million in general operating grants.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive All Funds recommendation of $50
  million and adds $45 million for a total of $95 million as follows:
  o $20 million to be distributed via resolution.
  o $10 million for the Brooklyn Museum.
  o $10 million for the Museum of Natural History.
  o $5 million for the Irish Arts Center.
 
Criminal Justice Services, Division of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $93.4  million,  an increase of $3 million or three percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B):
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $609.5
  million and adds $157  million  for  a  total  of  $766  million  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  carves  out  $5  million for the Community Violence
  Intervention  Legislative  grants  from  an  existing  Executive
  appropriation.
  o The  Senate  carves  out $1 million for the Edward Byrne Justice
  Assistance  Grants  (JAG)  from  an  existing  Executive
  appropriation.
  o The Senate reduces the Project GIVE program by $35.6 million.
  o The  Senate  repurposes  $150  million  in various Prosecutorial
  Services grants for District Attorneys. The Senate  consolidates
  these  grants  into  one  appropriation  to  improve  the  grant
  contract process, ensuring funding  is  allocated  appropriately
  and  provided  in  a  more  timely  manner.  This  includes  the
  following:
  - $150 million for Prosecutorial Services grants for  District
  Attorneys  to support Discovery related costs, Retail Theft,
  and general prosecutorial services.
  - Funding awards will be developed in consultation with  local
  District Attorneys.
  - The  Division  of Criminal Justice Services will be required
  to submit an annual spending report to the  Legislature  and
  public  regarding  the  use  of funding and effectiveness of
  these grants.
  o The Senate adds $60 million to support additional funding  which
  will  be  suballocated  to  the  Judiciary,  Office  of Court of
  Administration (OCA) to support the following:
  - The Senate adds  $34  million  to  support  Problem  Solving
  Court,  which  includes  support  for  mental health courts,
  funding will be sub-allocated to the OCA.
  - The Senate adds $19.7 million to support additional  funding
  to Attorney for Child (AFC) contract providers, funding will
  be sub-allocated to the OCA.
 
  - The  Senate  adds $6 million to support Statewide Supervised
  Visits, funding will be sub-allocated to the OCA.
  o The  Senate  adds  $58  million  for Legal Services Grants for a
  total of $150  million,  to  support  Discovery  related  costs,
  criminal  defense,  civil,  housing  and other legal assistance.
  This includes the following:
  - $125 million will be allocated pursuant to a plan  developed
  by the Division of Criminal Justice Services.
  - $25 million will be allocated pursuant to plans developed by
  the Senate and Assembly.
  o The  Senate  repurposes  $40 million from various appropriations
  for State and Local Law Enforcement grants, which  includes  $25
  million in funding from the Division of State Police. The Senate
  consolidates  these grants into one appropriation to improve the
  grant  contract  process,  ensuring  funding  is  allocated
  appropriately  and provided in a more timely manner to State and
  Local Law Enforcement to support  the  following:  Extreme  Risk
  Protection  Orders,  Retail  Theft  and  other  public  safety
  programs.
  - The Division of Criminal Justice Services will  be  required
  to  work  with  State and Local Law Enforcement to develop a
  plan and submit an annual spending report to the Legislature
  and public regarding the use of funding and effectiveness of
  these grants.
  o The Senate adds $25 million for Community Safety and Restorative
  Justice  Legislative  grants;  including  Gun  Violence,
  Alternatives-To-Incarceration  (ATI),  Re-Entry,  Domestic
  Violence, Legal Services and support for survivors of crime.
  o The Senate adds $10 million to support  New  Article  VII  Part,
  which  establishes  the Wrongful Convictions Act, as proposed in
  S.7548.
  o The Senate adds $7 million  for  grants  supporting  victims  of
  crime  service  providers,  offset  any  loss  in revenue in the
  Criminal Justice Improvement Account.
  o The Senate adds $5 million  for  the  Youth  Justice  Innovation
  program.
  o The  Senate  adds $3 million for the Westchester County Policing
  program.
  o The Senate adds  $50,000  for  Firearm  Violence  Research  Fund
  services and expenses.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive All Funds recommendation of $85
  million as follows:
  o The Senate modifies appropriation and  reappropriation  language
  for  the Securing Communities Against Hate Crime (SCAHC) program
  to expand the use  of  funding  to  cover  security  operational
  expenses.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * PART  A  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  increase penalties for assaults on retail workers  to  the  class  D
  felony of Assault in the Second Degree.
  * PART  B  --  The  Senate  modifies the Executive proposal to make it
  illegal to Foster the Sale of Stolen Goods by incorporating language
  that clarifies the  individuals  subject  to  the  offense  and  the
  actions to which the offense would apply.
 
  * PART  C  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  add additional crimes to the list of "specified  offenses"  eligible
  for prosecution as a hate crime. The Senate is committed to tackling
  the  recent  surge  in  hate  crimes  and  will work with government
  partners  to  explore additional measures and legislative actions to
  address this issue.
  * NEW PART WW -- The Senate advances  language  that  allows  for  the
  aggregation of retail theft crimes in cases where there are multiple
  and  successive  retail  thefts  that  occur  over a period of three
  months.
  * NEW PART BBB  --  The  Senate  advances  language  that  enacts  the
  'Challenging  Wrongful  Convictions  Act'  which  would  expand  the
  grounds under which  a  motion  to  vacate  judgment  may  be  filed
  (S.7548).
  * NEW PART HHH -- The Senate advances language that eliminates certain
  mandatory  surcharges  imposed  on  those convicted of misdemeanors,
  violations, and traffic offenses, and grants the court discretion to
  reduce or waive criminal fines and fees in certain cases.
 
Deferred Compensation Board
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the All Funds recommendation of $1  million,
  an increase of $52,000 from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Dormitory Authority of the State of New York
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8308-B)
  * PART  U  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  give the Dormitory Authority authorization to  provide  services  to
  State  and local entities that receive federal grants or loans under
  the American Rescue Plan Act,  Infrastructure  Investment  and  Jobs
  Act,  and  Inflation  Reduction  Act,  or state assistance under the
  Environmental Bond Act, Downtown Revitalization  Initiative,  or  NY
  Forward programs.
  * PART  V  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  extend DASNY's subsidiary authority by three years.
 
Economic Development, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate modifies with the Executive All Funds  recommendation  of
  $33.2 million, and adds $1.2 million for a total of $34.4 million as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $1.2 million for the MWBE Utilization Monitor
  Program.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of  $67.2  million,
  and adds $4.6 million for a total of $71.8 million as follows:
  o The Senate restores $4.6 million for the following:
  - $1.9  million  in  additional  support  for  the  Center  of
  Excellence (COE), for a total of $14 million.
  - $1.4  million  in  additional  support  for  the  Center  of
  Advanced Technology (CAT), for a total of $15 million.
  - $1  million  in  additional support for the Tourism Matching
  Grants Program, for a total of $3.5 million.
 
  o The Senate adds $150,000 for the Business Incubator  Association
  of New York State.
 
Education Department, New York State
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive recommendation of $688.5 million
  and adds $6.9 million, for a total of $695.5 million, as follows:
  o Restores $150,000 for Rochester District Fiscal Consultant.
  o Adds $6.8 million for the following:
  - $4.5  million  for  ELL  assessments  for  students  with
  disabilities.
  - $1 million for Foundation Aid study.
  - $934,000 for SED Charter School operations.
  - $352,000 for underrepresented teachers convention.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive recommendation of $44.9 billion,
  and adds $1.2 billion, for a total $46.1 billion, as follows:
  o Rejects:
  - All Executive  changes  to  Foundation  Aid,  including  the
  elimination of "hold harmless" and redefining inflation.
  o Redirects:
  - $100 million in unallocated funds to the school-aid run.
  o Restores:
  - $21.4 million for teacher resource centers.
  - $13.4 million for Bundy Aid.
  - $12 million for Yonkers School District.
  - $5 million for arts instruction for nonpublic schools.
  - $2 million for Postsecondary Students with Disabilities.
  - $1.4 million for Higher Education Opportunity Programs.
  - $1 million for nonpublic school vaccination recordkeeping.
  - $903,000 for Henry Viscardi School for the Deaf.
  - $903,000 for New York School for the Deaf.
  - $750,000 for Long Island Pre-K Initiative.
  - $750,000 for New York State Academic Dental Centers.
  - $738,000 for Liberty Partnership.
  - $650,000 for NYC Kids Rise.
  - $636,000 for Science and Technology Entry Program.
  - $500,000 for Cleary School for the Deaf.
  - $500,000 for Mill Neck Manor School for the Deaf.
  - $500,000 for SUNY Albany Center for Autism.
  - $482,000  for  the  Collegiate  Science and Technology Entry
  Program.
  - $350,000 for Latino U College Access.
  - $250,000 for Townsend Harris High School Bridge Program.
  - $241,000 for the Foster Youth Initiative.
  - $225,000 for East Ramapo District Monitor.
  - $175,000 for Hempstead District Monitor.
  - $175,000 for Rochester District Monitor.
  - $175,000 for Wyandanch District Monitor.
  - $150,000 for St. Francis School for the Deaf.
  - $150,000 for St. Mary's School for the Deaf.
  o Adds:
  - $747 million for school aid, providing a minimum  3  percent
  increase for all school districts.
  - $150 million for universal pre-K.
  - $125 million for universal school meals.
 
  - $105 million for community school funding formula.
  - $50 million for prior-year aid queue.
  - $12.5 million for distribution via resolution.
  - $10 million for 4201 teacher salaries.
  - $10 million for Excessive Teacher Turnover Grants.
  - $10 million for Direct Care Support Turnover Grants.
  - $5  million  to  combat  anti-semitism,  islamophobia,  and
  anti-Asian hate in schools.
  - $5 million for transportation after 4pm.
  - $5 million for underrepresented teachers of tomorrow.
  - $4 million for tax certiorari assistance.
  - $3.5  million  carveout  for  consortium  for  workforce
  education.
  - $2.5 million for Dolly Parton Imagination Library program.
  - $2.5 million for library operating aid.
  - $2 million for independent living centers.
  - $2 million for NYSUT Many Threads, One Fabric.
  - $2 million for Executive Leadership Institute.
  - $1.5 million for adult literacy education.
  - $1 million for the New York Public Library.
  - $1 million for United Community Schools.
  - $922,000  for  nonpublic  school  academic  intervention
  services.
  - $903,000 for Lexington School for the Deaf.
  - $600,000 for Magellan Foundation.
  - $300,000 for Rochester School for the Deaf.
  - $250,000 for NY Medical College.
  - $150,000 for East Ramapo District Liaison.
  - $125,000 for Schomburg Library.
  - $27,500 for Langston Hughes Library.
  o The Senate calls on the Executive to  provide  additional  local
  assistance  to districts to comply with the requirements of A.R.
  v. Connecticut State Board of Education, which found that States
  must extend  eligibility  for  a  free  and  appropriate  public
  education  (FAPE)  to students with disabilities until they turn
  age 22.
  o The Senate also supports updates  to  UPK  funding  to  increase
  utilization  and  reduce  confusion  among  school  districts,
  including consolidation of funding streams.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of  $114.2  million
  and adds $126 million for a total of $240.2 million as follows:
  o $50 million for 4201 schools.
  o $45  million  for  health  and  safety  projects  and  nonpublic
  schools.
  o $20 million for library capital.
  o $4.5 million for health  and  safety  projects  at  special  act
  schools.
  o $4 million for Lexington School for the Deaf.
  o $2.5 million for laundry pilot program in NYC schools.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8306-B)
  * PART  A  --  The  Senate  modifies the Executive proposal related to
  school aid to:
  o Accept the Contracts for Excellence extender for  the  2023-2024
  school year.
 
  o Intentionally  omit  the  inflationary  factory  changes  of
  Foundation Aid.
  o Intentionally  omit  the  elimination  of  hold  harmless  of
  Foundation Aid.
  o Intentionally omit the state sharing ratio of Foundation Aid.
  o Accept the removal of the small city debt limit for building aid
  emergency construction.
  o Expand the proposal that excludes Environmental Bond  Act  funds
  for  the transition to zero emission buses from being considered
  revenue, by also excluding federal funds for the conversion.
  o Accept the amendments  to  the  Smart  Schools  Investment  Plan
  approval process.
  o Intentionally  omit  the  four-year  extender  of  mayoral
  accountability.
  o Expand the five-year extender of the Teacher of Tomorrow program
  to include  an  Underrepresented  Teacher  of  Tomorrow  program
  (amended version of S.1192).
  o Provide a one-year extension of the special education class size
  variance and waiver.
  o Increase  the  allocation  for  Consortium  for Worker Education
  reimbursement for the 2024-25 school year to $15 million.
  o Limits the extension of the  tuition  rate  setting  methodology
  report to July 1, 2026.
  * NEW PART A-1 -- The Senate advances language to:
  o Establish  the  Universal  School  Meals  Program to require all
  schools that  participate  in  the  National  School  Lunch  and
  Breakfast Program to serve breakfast and lunch at no cost to the
  student (amended version of S.1678-A).
  o Expand capital outlay authority to school districts (S.2990).
  o Establish  multi-year  cost  allowances  for the Binghamton City
  School District (S.2672).
  o Require interim rates to include the annual  growth  amount  for
  such  rates  approved  in  the  current school year and annually
  thereafter for Special Act School Districts,  853  schools,  and
  4410 schools.
  o Increase tuition rates for all Special Act School Districts, 853
  schools,  and  4410  schools  commensurate  with  the  state aid
  increases (amended version of S.6516-A of 2022).
  o Authorize 4201 schools to establish a fiscal reserve fund.
  o Increase the aidable salary for BOCES staff over the next  three
  years.
  o Extend  reimbursement  for ninth graders in Special Services Aid
  for non-component school districts and increase  the  per  pupil
  cap.
  o Expand community school grants and the distribution of funding.
  o Establish  an Arts and Music Grant Program for nonpublic schools
  to hire certified arts and music teachers.
  o Repeal language included in  the  2021-22  Enacted  Budget  that
  treats  federal  Paycheck  Protection  Program funds received by
  Special Act School Districts, 853 Schools, and 4410  Schools  as
  offsetting revenue.
  o Establish  a  zero-emission  bus agency leadership level working
  group to spearhead  the  implementation  of  the  transition  to
  zero-emission school buses.
  o Extend  reimbursement,  currently  available  to  small  city,
  central, common,  and  union  free  school  districts,  for  the
  transportation of students below the current 1.5-mile limit when
 
  the  State Education Department deems there is a safety issue to
  the Big 5 school districts.
  o Establish  a  comprehensive  study of the Foundation Aid formula
  (amended version of S.7536).
  o Increase  library  materials  aid  factor  to  eleven  dollars
  (S.8478).
  o Establish  a statewide and regional convention to bring together
  underrepresented teachers (S.1988).
  o Establish Dolly Parton's Statewide Imagination  Library  Program
  (S.8514).
  o Increase funding for school transportation after 4pm in New York
  City.
  o Reform  the  Universal Prekindergarten Program by increasing the
  overall and per  pupil  funding  for  prekindergarten,  increase
  funding for districts that receive the half-day rate, expand the
  UPK  program,  and  direct  SED  to  conduct  a study to provide
  recommendations on the consolidation of UPK funding streams  and
  programs.
  * PART  B  --  The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to establish
  evidence and science based reading instruction  best  practices  for
  students in pre-k to third grade to amend the enforcement mechanism.
  * PART  C  --  The  Senate  modifies the Executive proposal related to
  FAFSA and Senator Jose Peralta NYS Dream Act completion  to  include
  data sharing, privacy provisions, and require HESC to issue a report
  on application competition (amended version of S.8148).
  * PART  D  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  limit Bundy Aid apportionment.
  * PART E -- The Senate modifies the Executive  proposal  to  authorize
  the  sharing  of student data between the State Education Department
  (SED), the Higher Education Services Corporation (HESC),  the  State
  University  of  New  York (SUNY), or the City University of New York
  (CUNY) for educational purposes,  consistent  with  federal  privacy
  laws  to  include  a  data protection agreement created by the State
  Education Department.
 
Elections, State Board of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate accepts the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of  $31
  million  and  adds  $5.2  million  for  a  total of $36.2 million as
  follows:
  o The Senate adds $5 million to support the Dr. John  Flateau  New
  York Voting and Elections Database and Academic Center (S.657A).
  o The  Senate  adds  $200,000  for  New York to join a Multi-State
  Voter List Maintenance Organization, the Electronic Registration
  Information Center (ERIC).
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate accepts the Executive All Funds recommendation of  $112.7
  million,  and  adds  $10.8  million for a total of $123.5 million as
  follows:
  o The Senate adds $10 million for local Boards  of  Elections  for
  staff, training, and informational campaigns.
  o The Senate adds $820,000 for the Public Campaign Finance Board.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
 
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $14.7 million, a decrease  of  $300,000  or  2.0  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * NEW  PART  Z  --  The  Senate advances language to establish the Dr.
  John Flateau New York Voting Rights  Database  and  Academic  Center
  (S.657A).
  * NEW  PART  AA  --  The Senate advances language to require the State
  Board of Elections to join the Electronic  Registration  Information
  Center  (ERIC), a multistate voter list maintenance organization (S.
  6173B).
 
Empire State Development Corporation
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive Recommendation of $307.9  million,
  and adds $7 million for a total of $314.9 million as follows:
  o The Senate restores $6.4 million for the following:
  - $5 million for Alive Downtown.
  - $1.4 million in additional support for MWBE Lending Program,
  for a total of $2 million.
  o The Senate adds $31.5 million for the following:
  - $20  million to support high-speed broadband internet access
  in all temporary housing facilities.
  - $1.5 million in additional support for Community Development
  Financial Institutions (CDFI), for a total of $3 million.
  - $10 million to support legislative initiatives.
  o The  Senate  eliminates  $26.2  million  for  the  Empire  State
  Economic Development Fund for rejection of Part Z of TEDE.
  o The Senate reduces $4.7 million in support for the following:
  - $2.7  million  for  Entrepreneurial  Assistance  Center  for
  rejection of Part X of TEDE, for a total of $1.8 million.
  - $2 million for the Global Entrepreneur Program, for a  total
  of $2 million.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive Recommendation of $1.9 billion,
  and subtracts $430 million for a total of $1.5 billion as follows:
  o The Senate eliminates $1.58 billion for the following:
  - $500  million  for  the  NY  CREATES  Nanotech  Ultraviolet
  Lithography Center.
  - $250 million for Launch NY AI consortium.
  - $100 million for FAST NY.
  - $80  million for One Network Regional Advanced Manufacturing
  Partnership initiative (On-RAMP).
  - $400 million for the New  York  Works  Economic  Development
  Fund.
  o The Senate adds $1.05 billion for the following:
  - $930  million  to  support  the  NY  CREATES Albany Nanotech
  Ultraviolet Lithography Center,  Launch  NY  AI  consortium,
  FAST NY, and On-RAMP initiatives. The Legislature would like
  to obtain adequate details on the various proposals, as well
  as  implement  requisite  financial  guardrails  and  agency
  transparency requirements for projects.
  - $50 million for SUNY Buffalo Thermal Network.
  - $40 million for SUNY Purchase Thermal Network.
 
  - $17 million for the  Town  of  Henrietta  for  a  substation
  transformer.
  - $5 million for the Universal Hip Hop Museum.
  - $6  million  for  Kingston  Bulkhead Improvements on Rondout
  Creek.
  - $30 million to support legislative initiatives.
  o The Senate eliminates the $250 million NY RUSH appropriation  to
  utilize that funding to support an alternative housing proposal.
  o The Senate modifies the $50 million for Restore New York program
  by  adding  language  excluding  funding  from  being  used  for
  demolition projects.
  o The Senate modifies the $300 million ConnectALL  reappropriation
  by adding a $72 million carveout to support high-speed broadband
  internet access in all temporary housing facilities.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * PART  X  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  increase the cap on grants  to  Entrepreneurial  Assistance  Centers
  (EAC) from $175,000 to $250,000 pending more information.
  * PART  Y  --  The  Senate modifies the Executive Proposal's five-year
  extension of the Minority and Women-owned Business Enterprise (MWBE)
  program by extending the program for one  year  until  December  31,
  2025.
  * PART  Z  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  extend the Urban Development Corporation's authority  to  administer
  the  Empire  State  Economic  Development Fund for three years until
  July 1, 2027.
  * PART AA -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal  to
  extend  the  Urban Development Corporation's general loan powers for
  three years until July 1, 2027.
  * NEW  PART  TT  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  establish  a
  requirement  that  Regional  Economic  Development  Council awardees
  certify that they maintain  internship  programs  for  young  people
  between the ages of 18 and 24.
 
Employee Relations, Office of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the All Funds recommendation of $16 million,
  an  increase  of  $3.9  million,  or  33.3 percent, from SFY 2023-24
  levels.
 
Energy Research and Development Authority
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate concurs  with  the  All  Funds  recommendation  of  $25.8
  million,  a  decrease  of  $200  million,  or 88.6 percent, from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * PART M -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal  extending  the
  Build  Ready  Program  to  April  19,  2030 by extending the program
  instead to April 19, 2027 and adding  language  to  preserve  viable
  agricultural land (S.1416).
  * PART  N  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  renew the special assessment on electric and gas utilities  to  fund
  certain programs at the Energy Research and Development Authority.
 
Environmental Conservation, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $579.1
  million,  and  adds  $600,000,  for  a  total  of $579.7 million, as
  follows:
  o The Senate adds $600,000 to establish  a  new  Office  of  Flood
  Control.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive recommendation of $1.9 million,
  and adds $720,00 million for a total of $2.6 million, as follows:
  o The Senate restores $720,000 for the following:
  - $500,000 for the Great Lakes Commission.
  - $120,000 for the Adirondack Diversity Initiative.
  - $50,000  for  the  Catskill  Center  for  Conservation  &
  Development.
  - $50,000 for the Catskill Mountainkeeper.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
 
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive recommendation of $1.9 billion,
  and adds $363.1 million, for a total of $2.3 billion, as follows:
  o Rejects the Executive's $25 million proposal  for  miscellaneous
  funding  in  the  Environmental  Protection Fund. Line increases
  include:
  - Open Space account increased to $196.6 million.
  - Parks,  Recreation  and  Historic  Preservation  account
  increased to $120.6 million.
  - Solid Waste account increased to $61 million.
  - Public  access  and  stewardship projects increased to $50.5
  million.
  - Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation  account  increased
  to $46.9 million.
  - Parks  projects, including municipal parks, increased to $26
  million.
  - Water  quality  improvement  projects  increased  to  $24.6
  million.
  - Farmland protection increased to $23 million.
  - Zoos,  Botanical  Gardens,  and  Aquaria  (ZBGA)  funding
  increased to $20 million.
  - Invasive species projects increased to $18.5 million.
  - Waterfront  revitalization  projects  increased  to  $14.3
  million.
  - Climate smart communities increased to $13.5 million.
  - Environmental justice projects increased to $13.2 million.
  - Climate resiliency plans increased to $10.5 million.
  - Hudson Estuary increased to $7.5 million.
  - Finger  Lake  -  Lake  Ontario  Watershed  increased to $3.5
  million.
  - Lake Erie-Niagara River Watershed Basin Program increased to
  $2 million.
  - Niagara River Greenway Commission increased to $500,000.
  - The Senate also carves out priority projects, including:
  * $2.1 million for the SUNY ESF Timbuctoo pipeline.
  * $2  million  for  Adirondack  lake  monitoring  survey
  (SCALE).
  * $1.5 million for SUNY ESF's Forestry Institute.
 
  * $500,000 for the revitalization of the Great South Bay.
  * $500,000 for the maintenance of forests and woodlands.
  * $125,000 for the Long Island City Coalition.
  o The  Senate  restores  $250  million  for  the  Clean  Water
  Infrastructure Act  with  $15  million  dedicated  to  Per-  and
  Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS).
  o The Senate provides $112.5 million in additional funding for the
  following:
  - $100  million  for  the  Safe  Water  Infrastructure  Action
  Program.
  - $12.5 million for the Harmful Algal Bloom Grant Program.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * PART S -- The Senate concurs with the Executive proposal to increase
  the  state  share  for  Climate  Smart  Communities  grants  for
  disadvantaged  communities  and  communities  experiencing financial
  hardship.
  * PART T -- The Senate modifies the  Executive  proposal  to  increase
  fees  for  stationary  sources  of air pollution by omitting the fee
  increases on air facility registrations in consideration of the cost
  impacts on small businesses,  and  by  focusing  the  Department  of
  Environmental  Conservation's  rulemaking authority expansion on new
  air pollution fee programs to address severe nonattainment zones  in
  the New York Metropolitan Area.
  * NEW  PART  QQ -- The Senate advances language to codify the position
  of  the  Catskill  Park  Coordinator  within  the  Department  of
  Environmental Conservation, similar to S.1413.
  * NEW  PART  RR -- The Senate advances language to establish an Office
  of Flooding Prevention and Mitigation, similar to S.3335-A.
  * NEW PART SS -- The Senate advances language to establish  a  climate
  change  cost  recovery program to require fossil fuel companies that
  have contributed significantly to the buildup of  greenhouse  gasses
  in  the  atmosphere  to  remit  payments  to the State based on such
  companies' greenhouse gas contributions, and directs the proceeds to
  be used for  climate  change  adaptation  expenditures,  similar  to
  S.2129-A.
  * NEW PART XX -- The Senate advances language to direct the Department
  of  Environmental  Conservation  to  establish a harmful algal bloom
  monitoring program, promulgate regulations for harmful  algal  bloom
  monitoring,  prevention,  and  mitigation,  and  establish  a  grant
  program to fund projects to combat harmful algal blooms, similar  to
  S.8356.
  * NEW  PART AAA -- The Senate advances language to direct revenue from
  penalties for environmental violations currently  deposited  in  the
  general  fund  to  a  new  environmental enforcement account, and to
  increase penalties  for  environmental  violations  by  50  percent,
  resulting in increased revenue for the Environmental Protection Fund
  and for enforcement of environmental laws, similar to S.7086.
  * NEW PART III -- The Senate advances language to fund replacement and
  rehabilitation  of  local  public  drinking  water,  stormwater, and
  sanitary  sewer  systems,  including  in  New  York  City,  and  to
  distribute  such  funding  based  on  a variety of factors including
  length and width of pipes, infrastructure age, the nature  of  other
  water  system  assets, and socioeconomic factors in order to achieve
  an equitable distribution of aid, similar to S.4350-A.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8305-B)
 
  * NEW PART GGG -- The Senate advances language relating to the filling
  of borrow pits in Jamaica Bay (S.8547).
 
Ethics and Lobbying in Government, Commission on
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $8.1 million, an increase  of  $279,000  or  3.6  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8305-B)
  * NEW  PART  YY  --  The Senate advances language that prohibits State
  reimbursement of campaign and political committees, or legal defense
  funds, for payments made on behalf of  the  criminal  defense  of  a
  State employee (S.150).
 
Executive Chamber
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $23.3 million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Financial Control Board
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $3.5
  million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Financial Services, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate accepts the Executive All Funds recommendation of $457.2
  million, and adds $500,000 for a total of $457.7 million as follows:
  o $500,000 to support a Public Bank Feasibility Study  (TEDE  Part
  DDD).
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  accepts the Executive All Funds recommendation of $76.8
  million, and adds $250,000 for a total of $77 million as follows:
  o The Senate restores $250,000 for  the  Education  Debt  Consumer
  Assistance Program (EDCAP).
  o The Senate proposes to modify Commuter Van Stabilization Program
  reappropriation  authority  to  expand allowable uses to include
  implementing for-hire vehicle insurance rate reductions via TEDE
  Part YY.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $60 million, an increase of $60 million from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8308-B)
  * PART  BB  -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to extend the
  Assistance  Demonstration  Project  for  Displaced  Workers  for  an
  additional year.
  * PART  CC -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  license and regulate buy now, pay later lenders.
  * PART DD -- The Senate accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  require
  motor  vehicle  insurance  policies  to include supplemental spousal
 
  liability coverage when the policyholder has indicated that they are
  married.
  * PART  EE  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to eliminate
  cost sharing for insulin in commercial health insurance policies.
  * PART FF -- The Senate accepts the  Executive  proposal  to  prohibit
  insurance  companies  that insure damage to real property containing
  affordable housing units from inquiring on an  application  or  from
  canceling,  refusing to issue or renew, or increasing a premium of a
  policy based on affordable housing factors.
  * PART HH -- The Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  impose
  higher  penalties  on  health  insurance  companies  that  willfully
  violate mental health parity laws and regulations.
  * PART II -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal  to
  allow  financial  institutions  to  place holds on transactions that
  they reasonably believe involve financial exploitation of seniors or
  an adult individual with a mental or physical impairment.
  * PART LL -- The Senate modifies  the  Executive  proposal  to  create
  equivalent  assessments  for member companies of the Life and Health
  Insurance Guaranty Fund and to simplify the issuance of tax  credits
  for such assessments by including a timeline for the issuance of the
  tax certificates and making technical changes.
  * PART  NN  --  The  Senate modifies the Executive proposal to require
  prior approval of any  changes  in  motor  vehicle  insurance  rates
  relating  to  for-hire  vehicles  and  to  permanently  extend  the
  Department of Financial Services's  authority  to  approve  for-hire
  vehicle  insurance rates by retaining the current authorization time
  period.  The Senate passed legislation extending this  authorization
  until 2026 (Chapter 182 of 2023).
  * NEW PART YY -- The Senate advances language directing the Department
  of  Financial  Services  to  create  a captive insurance program for
  commuter vans,  black  cars,  ambulettes,  paratransits,  and  small
  school buses, which works based off of S.8432.
  * NEW  PART  DDD -- The Senate advances language to create a temporary
  commission to study the feasibility of  a  state-owned  public  bank
  (S.1755-C).
 
Gaming Commission
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  All  Funds appropriation
  recommendation of $111.4 million, an increase of  $3.6  million,  or
  3.2 percent, from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S. 8003-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  All  Funds appropriation
  recommendation of $262 million, an increase of $25 million,  or  9.5
  percent, from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8309-B)
  * PART  O  --  The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to authorize
  the use of capital funds by Capital  Off-Track  Betting  Corporation
  (Capital  OTB)  for one year to provide similar authorization to the
  Catskill OTB.
  * PART P -- The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  extend
  pari-mutuel tax rates and simulcast provisions for one year.
  * NEW  PART  Q  --  The  Senate  advances language to allow for Mobile
  Sports Betting platforms to provide  for  certain  season-long  prop
  bets.
 
  * NEW  PART  R  --  The  Senate  advances language to provide that one
  percent of Mobile Sports Betting revenues shall be spent on  problem
  gambling  addiction services, with a minimum spend of $6 million per
  year, similar to S.8439.
 
General Services, Office of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $1.10 billion, an increase of $24 million or 2.2  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8003-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $15 million, an increase of $15 million from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $259.7  million,  a  decrease  of $2.6 million or 1 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * NEW PART HH -- The Senate advances language that requires the Empire
  State Plaza complex to utilize  renewable  energy  for  heating  and
  cooling (S.2689-B).
 
General State Charges
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  accepts  the Executive All Funds recommendation of $7.8
  billion, an increase of $765.8 million from SFY  2023-24,  and  adds
  $184.5 million for a total of $8 billion as follows:
  o The Senate adds $2.5 million for the rejection of PPGG Part R.
  o The Senate adds $5.7 million for the rejection of PPGG Part S.
  o The Senate adds $20 million for the rejection of PPGG Part T.
  o The  Senate adds $57 million for State employer costs associated
  with the inclusion of Tier 6 reforms.
  o The Senate adds $98.9 million for pension enhancement proposals.
  o The Senate adds $289,000 for a payment in lieu of taxes for  the
  state-owned lands within the city of Kingston.
  o The  Senate  adds  $33,000  a  payment  in lieu of taxes for the
  state-owned lands within the county of Ulster.
  o The Senate adds $36,000 for a payment in lieu of taxes  for  the
  state-owned lands within the town of Lloyd.
 
Green Thumb
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  All  Funds appropriation
  recommendation of $5.7 million, an  increase  of  $486,000,  or  9.3
  percent, from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Greenway Heritage Conservancy of the Hudson River Valley
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  All  Funds appropriation
  recommendation of $266,000, an increase of $16,000, or 6.4  percent,
  from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Health, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $3.1
  billion, and adds $1.5 million as follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $1.5  million  for  Article  VII  proposal,
  establishing  the  office  of hospice and palliative care access
  and quality.
 
Aid to Localities (S. 8003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the  Executive  recommendation  by  adding  $3.7
  billion State-Share spending as follows:
  o Public Health:
  - The  Senate adds $175 million to support the modification of
  Article VII HMH Part J, to  include  S2237-B  which  expands
  coverage for undocumented individuals ages 19 to 64.
  - The  Senate  adds  $65 million for the Hunger Prevention and
  Nutrition  Assistance  Program  (HPNAP)  and  Nourish  NY,
  providing a total of $150 million.
  - The  Senate adds $20.5 million for Public Health Legislative
  Grants.
  - The Senate adds $14.4 million to support the restoration  of
  Public Health Programs eliminated by the Executive.
  - The Senate adds $10.5 million for Spinal Cord Research.
  - The  Senate  adds  $10.4 million for NYS Occupational Health
  Clinic Network.
  - The Senate adds  $10  million  to  support  abortion  access
  grants for a total of $35 million.
  * The Senate modifies appropriations language to align the
  program  with  the Reproductive Freedom and Equity Grant
  program as proposed in S.348C, providing $10 million  to
  support increased reimbursement for abortion medication.
  - The Senate adds $10 million for Native Health Clinics.
  - The  Senate  adds  $10  million  to  support  an Article VII
  Proposal, which establishes a Medical debt forgiveness pilot
  program (S.5909B).
  - The Senate adds  $10  million  to  support  an  Article  VII
  proposal that increases the personal needs allowance amounts
  for eligible individuals (S.7786).
  - The Senate adds $5 million for Transformation Community Care
  Coordination (TC3) Projects.
  - The  Senate  adds  $2.5  million  to  support the United Way
  Preventative Care Access Initiative.
  - The Senate adds $2.2 million  for  Children's  Environmental
  Health Centers.
  - The Senate adds $2 million for the Lorena Borjas Transgender
  Wellness and Equity Fund (TWEF) program.
  - The  Senate  adds  $2  million  to  support  an  Article VII
  Proposal, which creates a New York-specific pregnancy mobile
  application for perinatal New Yorkers (S7700A).
  - The Senate adds $1.2 million for Nurse Family Partnership.
  - The Senate adds $1 million for  Public  Health  Studies  and
  Task Force bills.
  - The  Senate  adds  $800,000  to  support School Based Health
  Centers (SBHCs) programs, for a total of $12 million.
  * The Senate carves out $3.8 million to  allocate  funding
  to SBHCs pursuant to a resolution, in the same manner as
  the prior year.
 
  - The  Senate  adds  $500,000 for CUNY School of Public Health
  and Health Policy to support the Sexual Reproductive Justice
  Hub program.
  - The  Senate  adds $500,000 for Area Health Education Centers
  (AHEC).
  - The Senate adds $500,000 for  AMSNY  Diversity  in  Medicine
  Program and Scholarship.
  - The  Senate  adds  $250,000  for  Article  VII  Proposal,
  establishing a Study on Doula Friendly Spaces (S7780).
  - The Senate adds $250,000 to  support  New  York  Center  for
  Agriculture Medicine and Health (NYCAMH).
  - The  Senate  adds  $250,000  for  Article  VII  proposal,
  establishing  a  Community  Doula  Expansion  Grant  Program
  (S.7779B).
  o Medicaid:
  - The  Senate  adds  $1.6  billion  for  Article VII Proposal,
  providing Medicaid Reimbursement Rate Increases,  including;
  three  percent  Across-The-Board  (ATB)  rate  increase,  an
  additional 6.5 percent for Nursing Homes and Assisted Living
  Providers (ALP), and Hospice services, and an  additional  7
  percent  for Inpatient & Outpatient Hospital services, which
  support the following:
  * 10 percent rate  increase  for  Inpatient  &  Outpatient
  Hospital services.
  * 9.5 percent rate increase for Nursing Homes and Assisted
  Living Providers (ALP), and Hospice services.
  - The  Senate  adds  $600  million for funding for Financially
  Distressed Hospitals (FDH), for  a  total  of  $1.9  billion
  State-share.
  - The Senate adds $753 million to support budget reductions in
  the  Medicaid  assistance  program.  This  includes  the
  restoration of Managed Long Term Care and Mainstream Managed
  care Quality pools,  Nursing  Home  Vital  Access  Provider,
  Health  Homes,  Dual-Eligible Special Needs Plans and Office
  of Health Insurance Programs administrative cuts.
  * The Senate remains ready and willing to  work  with  the
  Executive  and  Assembly  to  develop  ways  to  achieve
  administrative  efficiencies  without  disrupting  the
  quality of care for Medicaid providers, including within
  Managed Long-Term Care.
  - The  Senate  adds  $212  million  to  support  intentionally
  omitting Article VII  HMH  Part  H,  Medicaid  Managed  Care
  reforms.
  - The  Senate  adds  $200.4  million  to support intentionally
  omitting Article VII HMH Part G, wage  parity  for  personal
  assistants  in  the  Consumer  Directed  Personal Assistance
  Program (CDPAP).
  - The Senate  adds  $39.3  million  to  support  intentionally
  omitting Article VII HMH Part K, Excess Medical Malpractice.
  - The Senate adds $37.4 million to support the modification of
  Article VII HMH Part I, Medicaid Pharmacy reforms.
  - The  Senate  adds $28 million to support the modification of
  Article VII HMH Part E, including the Nursing  Home  Capital
  Rate add on.
  - The Senate adds $21.3 million to support the modification of
  Article VII HMH Part D, Hospital reforms.
 
  - The  Senate  adds  $12.1  million  to  support intentionally
  omitting Article VII HMH Part L, discontinuation  of  public
  health programs.
  - The  Senate  adds  $4.1  million  to  support  Article  VII
  Proposal, maintain the  reimbursement  rates  for  Medically
  Fragile  Children  when they transition to Medically Fragile
  Young Adults (S5969).
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $519
  million  and  add  $1.82  billion  for  a  total  of $2.3 billion as
  follows:
  o The Senate adds $1.5  billion  for  the  Statewide  Health  Care
  Facility Transformation Program.
  o The  Senate  adds  $300  million  for  SUNY Downstate to support
  capital  improvements  pursuant  to  a  sustainability  plan,
  consistent with a chapter of the laws of 2024.
  o The Senate adds $20 million for Rare Disease and ALS research.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8307-B)
  * PART  A  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to extend the
  Medicaid Global  Cap  through  SFY  2026  by  instead  repealing  it
  (S.4861).
  * PART  B  --  The  Senate  modifies  the Executive proposal to extend
  various provisions and programs within the Public Health and  Mental
  Hygiene  Laws by making the carve-out of school based health centers
  from Medicaid managed care permanent (S.7840), extending the  notice
  of  closure  or  transfer  of  a  state-operated  individualized
  residential  alternative  (S.8183),  extending  the  Civil  Service
  Employees  Association's  Care Demonstration program for individuals
  with intellectual and developmental disabilities (S.8184), advancing
  certain  provisions  found  within  S.6733  regarding  reimbursement
  parity  services  provided  via  telehealth,  making  the telehealth
  extender  permanent,  making  the  Opioid  Stewardship  Fund  (OSF)
  extender  permanent, and directing that at least 10 percent of funds
  from the OSF be invested in recovery services and supports (S.8412).
  * PART C -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  remove  the
  temporary allowance of certified school psychologists to practice as
  Early Intervention (EI) providers and to extend the authorization of
  Non-EI  services  for  school  psychologists  for  certain preschool
  programs for an additional two years by only accepting the extension
  and rejecting the rest of the proposal.
  * PART D -- The  Senate  modifies  the  Executive  proposal  regarding
  hospitals  by  accepting  the provision realigning the Upper Payment
  Limit statute  with  the  calendar  year  while  preserving  current
  amounts  and  rejecting the reduction of the capital rate add-on and
  the extension of the Distressed Provider Assistance Program.
  * PART E -- The  Senate  modifies  the  Executive  proposal  regarding
  nursing  homes  by  accepting  the  provision  shortening  the state
  residency requirement for admission to a state-run Veterans Home and
  rejecting freezing the operating component of nursing home rates and
  the reduction of the capital cost component of the rates.
  * PART G -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  eliminate  wage  parity  for  personal  assistants  in  the Consumer
  Directed Personal Assistance Program (CDPAP) in New  York  City  and
  Nassau, Suffolk, and Westchester counties.
  * PART  H  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  exempt Medicaid managed care from the  state's  independent  dispute
 
  resolution  process, eliminate the one percent across-the-board rate
  increase for Medicaid managed  care,  authorize  the  Department  of
  Health  (DOH)  to  impose  liquidated  damages  to  managed  care
  organizations,  and  to temporarily stop the processing and approval
  of applications  to  establish  managed  care  providers  until  DOH
  completes a procurement process for the managed care program.
  * PART  I  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  allow the Department of Health to eliminate drugs from the  Medicaid
  list  of  over-the-counter  covered  drugs  without  prior  notice,
  eliminate prescriber prevails from Medicaid, require  pharmacies  to
  submit  annual  cost  reports,  reduce  Medicaid  reimbursement  for
  certain drugs, and to repeal the Medicaid Drug Cap and substitute it
  for an enhanced Supplemental Rebate Program.
  * PART J -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to make changes
  to the Essential Plan by  accepting  the  Executive's  proposals  to
  delay Essential Plan coverage of long term supports and services for
  individuals  up  to  200  of  the federal poverty line (FPL) for one
  year,  extending  the  state's  authority  to  implement  long  term
  supports  and  services  for  individuals  0-138 percent FPL who are
  ineligible for Medicaid due to  their  immigration  status  for  one
  year,  making  conforming  changes  to  the New York State of Health
  Marketplace  related  to  the  1332  State  Innovation  Waiver,  and
  authorizing  the  Department  of Health to seek a federal waiver for
  the  creation  of  a  premium/cost-sharing  subsidy  program  for
  individuals  under 350 percent FPL by including provisions to extend
  coverage  to  undocumented  individuals  through  the  1332  State
  Innovation Program (S.2237-B).
  * PART  K  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to extend the
  Hospital Liability Pool and the Excess Medical Malpractice Insurance
  program for an additional year and to change its  payment  structure
  by  only  accepting  the  extension  and  rejecting  the rest of the
  proposal.
  * PART L -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  discontinue certain public health programs.
  * PART  M  --  The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal to allow
  children up to the age of  6  to  remain  continuously  enrolled  in
  Medicaid  or  Child  Health  Plus  without  redetermining  their
  eligibility annually.
  * PART N -- The Senate modifies the Executive maternal health proposal
  to codify the right of minors to obtain contraception and all  forms
  of  reproductive  health  care  while  pregnant  by making technical
  changes that preserve the intent of  the  Reproductive  Health  Act,
  accepting  the issuance of a non-patient specific standing order for
  doula services, and intentionally omitting the proposal  to  require
  informed consent to test pregnant individuals for alcohol, cannabis,
  and drugs.
  * PART  O  --  The  Senate  modifies  the Executive proposal to expand
  hospital financial assistance under the Indigent Care Pool (ICP) and
  provide protections against medical  debt  by  accepting  provisions
  requiring  all hospitals to obtain informed consent for payment from
  the patient separately from their  consent  for  treatment,  placing
  enhanced  protections  on  applications for medical credit cards and
  other medical financial assistance products, requiring providers  to
  notify  patients  about the risks of using a standard credit card to
  pay medical debt, and  advancing  certain  provisions  found  within
  S.1366-B  increasing  eligibility for financial assistance under the
  ICP and creating a statewide uniform financial assistance policy.
 
  * PART P  --  The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  make
  temporary  provisions  regarding pharmacists and nurse practitioners
  permanent,  make  the  Collaborative  Drug  Therapy  Management
  Demonstration  program  permanent, and extend the Nurse Practitioner
  Modernization Act by two years.
  * PART  Q  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  expand the scope of practice  for  physician  assistants,  certified
  medication aides, dentists, and dental hygienists.
  * PART  R  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  enter New York into the Interstate Licensure Compact and  the  Nurse
  Licensure Compact.
  * PART  S  --  The  Senate modifies the Executive proposal to create a
  statewide Healthcare Safety Net Transformation  Program  to  support
  safety  net  hospitals  through  five-year  partnerships  with other
  healthcare facilities  by  creating  a  new  Statewide  Health  Care
  Transformation  Program  VI  with language ensuring the geographical
  balancing of the distribution of funds under such program.
  * PART T  --  The  Senate  modifies  the  Executive  proposal  to  end
  preventable  epidemics  by  accepting  the  clarification  of  Human
  Immunodeficiency  Virus  (HIV)  notice  of  testing  requirements,
  requiring  clinical  laboratories  to  report  to  the Department of
  Health both positive and negative results for HIV, Hepatitis  B  and
  C,  and  Syphilis,  allowing  licensed  pharmacists  to dispense HIV
  Pre-exposure  Prophylaxis  through  a  non-patient  specific  order,
  allowing  licensed  pharmacists  to administer the Monkeypox vaccine
  through a non-patient specific order, accepting the  repeal  of  the
  criminalization  of  sexual  activity by an individual who knowingly
  has a sexually transmitted infection and has sexual intercourse with
  another  person,  and  advancing  certain  provisions  found  within
  S.3467-A regarding authorizing pharmacists to perform HIV tests.
  * PART  U  -- The Senate modifies the Executive's opioids and overdose
  prevention  proposals  by  accepting  the  provision  exempting
  practitioners  from  verifying certain registries before prescribing
  or ordering a controlled substance for use  at  certain  facilities,
  allowing  disclosure  of  patient identifying information to certain
  programs within the Department of  Health  (DOH)  and  local  health
  departments  for  public health research, surveillance, or education
  and retaining such information  for  a  number  of  years,  allowing
  providers  to initiate maintenance treatment by dispensing a certain
  supply  of  Buprenorphine  in  accordance  with  federal  law  while
  arranging a referral to an authorized maintenance program, repealing
  the  requirement  for a practitioner to submit a confidential report
  to DOH regarding a patient's potential  drug  or  alcohol  use,  and
  rejecting  the  inclusion  of  several  controlled substances to the
  State's Controlled Substances Schedule.
  * PART V -- The  Senate  modifies  the  Executive  proposal  regarding
  Hospital  at  Home and Emergency Medical Services (EMS) by rejecting
  the Hospital at Home program, the extension  and  expansion  of  the
  Mobile  Integrated and Community Paramedicine Program, the change in
  the definition of emergency medical services, the authorization  EMS
  demonstration  programs,  the  authorization  certified  nurse
  practitioners  and  licensed  physicians  to  prescribe  and  order
  non-patient  specific  regimens  to  allow  EMS  practitioners  to
  administer vaccines, the creation of the minimum standards  for  the
  licensure of EMS practitioners and for the specialized credentialing
  of  these  practitioners,  the  enactment  of the "Emergency Medical
  Services Essential Services Act," and the authorization of paramedic
  urgent care  programs.  The  Senate  instead  advances  language  to
 
  declare  general  ambulance  services  as  an  essential  service,
  establish special districts  for  the  financing  and  operation  of
  general  ambulance  services,  and  provide  for  a  statewide
  comprehensive emergency medical system plan (S.4020-C).
  * PART  GG  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to allow the
  Department of Health (DOH) to permanently enter into  contracts  and
  amend  the terms of current contracts awarded before the approval of
  the 1115 Waiver to help DOH implement projects authorized under  the
  Waiver by allowing such authority for one year.
  * PART  HH  --  The  Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal
  regarding the Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Program (CDPAP),
  which would repeal the fiscal intermediary procurement  and  instead
  replace  it  with  an authorization process, allow the Department of
  Health to issue regulations on the  authorization  process  and  the
  program  generally,  eliminate  conflict  of interest between fiscal
  intermediaries, home care  agencies,  and  managed  long  term  care
  plans,  and  repeal  the "designated representative" provisions from
  CDPAP.
  * NEW PART II -- The  Senate  advances  language  to  allow  medically
  fragile  young  adults  who  reside in pediatric specialized nursing
  facilities to remain in place until the age of 36 and  maintain  the
  rates of reimbursement for these individuals (S.5969-A).
  * NEW  PART  JJ  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  update  the
  methodology used to calculate the reimbursement rates for  Federally
  Qualified Health Centers (S.6959).
  * NEW  PART KK -- The Senate advances language to update the inpatient
  reimbursement rates for nursing homes (S.6914).
  * NEW PART LL -- The  Senate  advances  language  to  reduce  the  fee
  collected  for  each  burial, removal, or transfer permit issued and
  remitted  to  the  State  to  fund  the  design,  development,
  implementation,  and  maintenance  of  the  NYS  electronic  death
  registration system (S.8511).
  * NEW PART MM -- The  Senate  advances  provisions  from  S.7700-A  to
  create  a  New  York-specific  pregnancy  mobile  application  for
  perinatal New Yorkers.
  * NEW PART NN -- The Senate advances language to increase  the  amount
  of  the  Medicaid savings exemption and eliminate the asset test for
  certain individuals who are Aged, Blind, and Disabled (S.4881-A).
  * NEW PART OO -- The Senate advances language to update the base  rate
  of payment for Assisted Living Programs (S.7248).
  * NEW  PART  PP -- The Senate advances language to repeal the 30-month
  look-back period for Medicaid eligibility  for  home  care  services
  (S.6414).
  * NEW  PART QQ -- The Senate advances language to establish the Office
  of Hospice and Palliative  Care  Access  within  the  Department  of
  Health (S.4858).
  * NEW  PART  RR  --  The Senate advances language to provide a uniform
  rate increase of  three  percent  for  Medicaid  payments,  with  an
  additional  seven  percent rate increase for hospitals and six and a
  half percent  rate  increase  for  nursing  homes,  assisted  living
  programs, and hospices.
  * NEW  PART  TT  --  The Senate advances language to establish a grant
  program to build reproductive healthcare  provider  capacity  within
  the state, fund uncompensated care, and provide financial support to
  organizations (S.348-C).
  * NEW  PART  VV  -- The Senate advances language to conduct a study on
  the current practices  in  integrating  doula  care,  services,  and
 
  support  within  birthing  centers,  hospitals, and other facilities
  (S.7780-A).
  * NEW PART WW -- The Senate advances language to establish a Community
  Doula Expansion Grant Program (S.7779-B).
  * NEW  PART  XX -- The Senate advances language to establish a medical
  debt relief program (S.5909-B).
  * The Senate directs the Department of  Health  to  submit  a  federal
  waiver  to  impose  a  per  member per month tax on all managed care
  companies, with higher rates imposed on Medicaid Managed Care  plans
  compared  to  non-Medicaid  plans.  This  tax  is  expected to yield
  approximately  $4  billion  in  additional  federal  financial
  participation per year for three years.
 
Medicaid Inspector General, Office of the
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendations of $57.5
  million  and  adds  $5  million,  for  a  total  of $62.5 million as
  follows:
  o The Senate adds $5 million to support an  Article  VII  proposal
  that amends OMIG audit procedures (S.5329-C).
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8307-B)
  * NEW  PART  AAA  --  The  Senate advances language to establish audit
  procedures and reform practices and standards for the adjustment  or
  recovery of medical assistance payments (S.5329-C).
 
Higher Education Facilities Capital Matching Grants Program (HECap)
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds Recommendation of zero
  by restoring $40 million.
 
Higher Education Services Corporation (HESC)
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $57  million,  a  decrease  of  $4  million  or 6.6 percent from SFY
  2023-24.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $968
  million  and  adds  $151.7  million, for a total of $1.12 billion as
  follows:
  o The Senate restores $3.5 million for the following.
  - $2.5 million for Say Yes to Buffalo Inc.
  - $1  million  for  the  Senator  Patricia  K.  McGee  Nursing
  Scholarship.
  - $50,000  for the New York Farmers Loan Forgiveness Incentive
  Program.
  o The Senate adds $148.2 million for the following.
  - $138 million to expand the TAP Program.
  - $10 million for Loan Expansion for Mental Health Workers.
  - $200,000  for  the  NYS  Child  Welfare  Worker  Incentive
  Scholarship Program.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8306-B)
 
  * PART  F  -- The Senate concurs with the Executive's proposal to make
  provisions of the NY-SUNY 2020 Challenge Grant Program Act permanent
  which covers full reimbursement of TAP tuition credit  to  SUNY  and
  CUNY schools.
  * NEW  PART  V  --  The Senate advances language to allow for students
  with disabilities in certain postsecondary education  experience  or
  transition programs to receive awards from TAP (S.1880).
  * NEW PART W -- The Senate advances language to reform the TAP program
  by  raising  the  maximum  income threshold for TAP eligibility from
  $80,000 to $125,000, increasing the minimum TAP award from  $500  to
  $1000,  increasing  the maximum TAP award from $5,665 to $6,165, and
  to  end  differential  treatment  for  dependent  and  independent
  students.
  * NEW PART GG -- The Senate advances language to expand TAP awards for
  dual or concurrent enrollment coursework (S.5616-A).
  * NEW  PART  II  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  apply TAP to
  part-time  students  attending  proprietary  degree-granting
  institutions (S.6466).
  * NEW  PART LL -- The Senate advances language to expand the Office of
  Mental Health Community Mental Health Loan  Repayment  Program  (OMH
  CMHLRP)  to  be applicable to additional mental health professionals
  such as Licensed Master Social  Workers,  Licensed  Clinical  Social
  Workers,  Licensed  Mental  Health  Counselors,  Licensed Marriage &
  Family Therapists, Psychoanalysts,  Creative  Arts  Therapists,  and
  Applied Behavior Analysts.
  * NEW  PART  QQ  --  The  Senate advances language to address the HESC
  overpayment issue to require that funding clawbacks shall not  occur
  where  an  inadvertent,  administrative  error  by  a  state  agency
  occurred.
 
Homeland Security and Emergency Services, Division of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $162.6  million,  an  increase of $23.4 million or 16.8 percent from
  SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S. 8003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $8.9
  billion,  and  adds  $2.8  million  for  a  total of $8.9 billion as
  follows:
  o The Senate carves out $2.4 million to support 2-1-1  phone  line
  services.
  o The Senate adds $2 million to support the American Red Cross.
  o The  Senate  adds  $750,000  to  support  the  New  York  State
  Professional Fire Fighters Association (NYSPFFA).
 
Capital Projects (S. 8004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds  recommendation  of  $21
  million, and adds $25 million for a total of $46 million as follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $25 million for Volunteer Firefighter Capital
  grants.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8305-B)
  * PART E -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal  to  extend  the
  suspension  of  the  annual transfer of $1.5 million from the Public
  Safety Communications Account to the  Emergency  Services  Revolving
  Loan Fund for the State Fiscal Years of 2024-25 and 2025-26.
 
Housing and Community Renewal
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $137.5
  million  by  adding  $5  million  for  a total of $142.5 million, to
  provide funding for the following:
  o $5  million  for  the  creation  of  an  Office  of  Civil
  Representation.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $99.5
  million by adding $345.3 million for a total of  $446.8  million  to
  provide funding for the following:
  o Restores:
  - $50 million for Land Banks and Land Trusts.
  - $40 million for the Homeowner Protection Program (HOPP).
  - $1  million  for  Senate  Legislative Priorities and adds $1
  million for a total of $2 million.
  - $250,000 for the Association for  Neighborhood  and  Housing
  Development (ANHD).
  o The  Senate provides $250 million for the Housing Access Voucher
  Program (HAVP).
  o The Senate provides $3 million for a Foreclosure Prevention  and
  Property Repair Program.
  o The  Senate  provides  $2 million in additional funding for Fair
  Housing Testing.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $182.2
  million by adding $1.1 billion  for  a  total  of  $1.3  billion  to
  provide funding for the following:
  o Restores:
  - $135  million  for  the  New  York  City  Housing  Authority
  (NYCHA), and adds $365 million for a total of $500 million.
  - $50  million  for  the  Mitchell  Lama  Preservation  and
  Homeownership Program.
  - $14.5  million  for the Affordable Housing Corporation for a
  total of $40.5 million.
  - $7 million for the Small Rental Development  Initiative  and
  adds $5 million for a total of $12 million.
  - $7  million  for  the  RESTORE  program  for a total of $8.4
  million.
  - $2 million and adds $1 million for  Access  to  Home  for  a
  total of $4 million.
  o The Senate adds:
  - The  Senate  proposes  to  repurpose $250 million in funding
  through Empire State Development for the purpose of the  New
  York Housing Opportunity Corporation.
  - $140 million for Public Housing Authorities outside the City
  of New York.
  - $40  million for the construction of one-to-two family small
  infill homes in Albany, Binghamton, Buffalo,  Syracuse,  and
  Rochester (a version of S.8585-A).
  - $40  million  to provide grants for owners of less than five
  units  to  bring  dilapidated  apartments  up  to  code  as
  affordable  rentals throughout the State outside of New York
  City (a version of S.8591).
 
  - $40 million to offer grants to repair vacant rent-stabilized
  apartments in New York City, as well as Nassau, Westchester,
  and Rockland counties.
  - $25 million for USDA 515 Rental Properties Preservation.
  - $15 million for Farm Worker Housing Revolving Loan Program.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8306-B)
 
  * PART  N  --  The  Senate modifies the Executive proposal to increase
  funding for the Rural Preservation Program  from  $5.36  million  to
  $7.75  million  and  increase  the  funding  for  the  Neighborhood
  Preservation Program funding from $12.83 million to $17.75  million.
  Such increases include funding for Rural Preservation Coalitions and
  Neighborhood  Preservation  Coalitions. The Senate increases funding
  for homeless housing programs from $53.58 million to $85.58 million.
  * PART O -- The Senate modifies the Executive's proposal to  establish
  the  crime  of  deed  theft  by  including  clarifying  language  to
  strengthen the criminal law components of the proposal (S.6569-B).
  * PART P -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to convey  land
  owned by SUNY and DOT to require that affordable housing be built as
  a condition of a lease of the identified property.
  * PART  Q  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to remove the
  12.0 Floor Area Ratio requirement from the Multiple Dwelling Law for
  developments in New York  City  subject  to  Mandatory  Inclusionary
  Housing  or  equivalent  affordability  requirements  and  that  are
  constructed outside of historic districts.
  * PART R -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to create a tax
  exemption for commercial conversions in New York City to  require  a
  greater  number  of  affordable units per project and to specify the
  benefit amount and duration.
  * PART S -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  authorize  New  York  City  to develop a program to legalize certain
  basement and cellar dwellings.
  * PART T -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  extend  the  421-a  tax  exemption  completion  deadline,  with  an
  intention to address projects as part  of  a  comprehensive  housing
  package.
  * PART  U  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  establish a tax  incentive  for  the  construction  of  multi-family
  rental  housing  to  replace  the  expired  421-a  program,  with an
  intention to address projects as part  of  a  comprehensive  housing
  package that includes tenant protections.
  * NEW  PART  HH  -- The Senate advances language to create the Housing
  Access Voucher Program to provide rental assistance in the  form  of
  vouchers  to individuals who are homeless or facing imminent risk of
  becoming homeless (S.568-B).
  * NEW PART MM -- The Senate advances language  to  require  the  State
  Fire  Prevention  and  Building  Code  Council  study  and  adopt
  regulations for single-exit, single stairway multi-unit  residential
  buildings of at least six stories (S.6573).
  * NEW  PART  NN  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  direct  the
  Comptroller of the City of New York  to  audit  projects  vested  in
  421-a tax incentive program (S.547-B).
  * NEW  PART RR -- The Senate advances a proposal to create a community
  land trust acquisition fund (S.2506-A).
  * NEW PART SS -- The Senate advances a proposal to create an  optional
  incentive  program for municipalities to legalize accessory dwelling
  units, to create an optional tax exemption for homeowners to  create
 
  accessory  dwelling units, and to create a state-level financing for
  accessory dwelling units (S.5172-A).
  * NEW  PART  TT -- The Senate advances language to establish an Office
  of Civil Representation aligned with the core principles of a  civil
  right to representation by counsel for individuals at risk of losing
  their housing accommodation (amended version of S.2721).
  * NEW  PART  WW  --  The Senate advances a proposal to provide capital
  financing for the construction of one-to-two family infill homes  in
  Buffalo,  Albany,  Syracuse,  Rochester,  and  Binghamton  (amended
  version of S.8585-A).
  * NEW PART YY -- The Senate advances language to codify the  Homeowner
  Protection Program (S.7297-A).
  * NEW  PART ZZ -- The Senate advances a proposal to provide grants for
  owners of five or fewer units to bring dilapidated apartments up  to
  code  as affordable rentals throughout the state outside of New York
  City (amended version of S.8591).
  * NEW PART AAA -- The Senate advances a proposal to  offer  grants  to
  repair  vacant  rent-stabilized apartments in New York City, as well
  as Nassau, Westchester, and Rockland counties.
  * NEW PART XX -- The Senate advances a proposal to create an  optional
  multifamily  tax  exemption  for  new  construction  and  commercial
  conversions in municipalities outside  of  New  York  City  (amended
  version of S.7865).
  * NEW  PART  CCC  --  The  Senate  advances  a proposal to finance the
  construction  of  new  affordable  and  mixed-income  housing  on
  state-owned land, including parcels referenced in ELFA Part P.
  * NEW  PART  DDD  -- The Senate advances a proposal to increase public
  assistance access and support for individuals at risk of eviction to
  keep them in their homes (amended versions of S.8622 and S.8652).
  * The Senate supports advancing tenant protections that align with the
  core principles of Good Cause Eviction.
  * The Senate is open to further  discussing  the  creation  of  a  tax
  exemption  for  new  multi-family construction in New York City that
  includes deeper affordability requirements, strong transparency  and
  compliance  provisions,  and  living  wages  for  construction  and
  building service workers, as part of a comprehensive housing package
  that includes the core principles of Good Cause Eviction. The Senate
  is also open to further discussing an extension  of  the  421-a  tax
  exemption  completion  deadline  for  projects already vested in the
  program as part of a comprehensive  housing  package  that  includes
  tenant protections.
  * The  Senate is open to further discussing raising the current cap on
  individual apartment improvements (IAIs) as part of a  comprehensive
  housing  package  that  includes  the  core principles of Good Cause
  Eviction.
  * The Senate recognizes the  need  to  further  increase  the  state's
  housing  supply  and  is  open to further discussion of concepts put
  forward in the Faith-Based Affordable Housing Act (S.7791).
 
Hudson River Valley Greenway Communities Council
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  All  Funds  appropriation
  recommendation  of  $245,000,  which  is consistent with SFY 2023-24
  levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
 
  * The Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  All  Funds  appropriation
  recommendation  of  $250,000,  which  is consistent with SFY 2023-24
  levels.
 
Human Rights, Division of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation of $28.88
  million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Indigent Legal Services, Office of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $7.9  million,  an  increase  of  $390,000  or  5.1 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S. 8003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $451.5
  million, and adds $52 million for  a  total  of  $503.5  million  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $46  million  for the Parental Representation
  Program for a total of $50 million.
  o The Senate adds $6 million to support Article VII new Part  EEE,
  which  increases  hourly  pay  for  the Assigned Counsel Program
  (18-B).
  o The Senate rejects the $234  million  sweep  from  the  Indigent
  Legal Service Fund to the General Fund.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * NEW  PART EEE -- The Senate advances language that raises the hourly
  rate for "18-B"  assigned  counsel  in  felony  cases  to  $164  and
  establishes  an  automatic  annual cost of living adjustment for all
  assigned counsel (S.8771).
 
Information Technology Services, Office of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $925.8  million,  an  increase of $62.5 million, or 7.2 percent from
  SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $130.7 million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * NEW PART CC -- The Senate advances language to require the Office of
  Information  Technology  and all other State agencies to set up data
  protection  standards,  vulnerability  assessments,  data  and
  information inventories, and recovery procedures (S.5007-A).
  * NEW  PART  KK  --  The Senate advances language to require statutory
  authorization  and  impact  assessments  for  state  agencies  using
  automated  decision-making  systems  (S.7543-B)  and  to  create the
  position of Chief Artificial Intelligence Officer within the  Office
  of Information Technology Services.
 
Inspector General, Office of the State
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $11.1 million, an increase of $1.3 million or 13.1 percent from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Interest on Lawyer Account
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $2.9 million, an increase of  $692,000  or  31.1  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $62 million, an increase of $10  million  or  19  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Judiciary
 
Legislature and Judiciary (S.8301)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the  Office of Court Administration All Funds
  recommendation of $3.74 billion, and adds $60 million for a total of
  $3.8 billion as follows:
  o The Senate adds $34 million to support  Problem  Solving  Court,
  which includes support for mental health courts, funding will be
  suballocated from Division of Criminal Justice Services to OCA.
  o The  Senate  adds $19.7 million to support additional funding to
  Attorney for Child (AFC) contract  providers,  funding  will  be
  suballocated from Division of Criminal Justice Services to OCA.
  o The  Senate  adds  $6  million  to  support Statewide Supervised
  Visits, funding will be suballocated from Division  of  Criminal
  Justice Services to OCA.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * PART  F  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal on
  judicial security. The Senate intends to address the  issue  outside
  of the budget process.
  * PART  R  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  apply a variable, market-based interest rate to court judgments.
  * NEW PART ZZ  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  ease  lobbying
  reporting  and  registration  fee  obligations  for  some  501(c)(3)
  non-profit organizations (S.5499).
  * NEW PART CCC -- The Senate advances language  to  lift  the  ban  on
  cameras in courtrooms.
  * NEW  PART  FFF -- The Senate advances language to enact the Grieving
  Families Act, which would modernize New York State law  on  wrongful
  death claims (S.8445).
 
Judicial Conduct, Commission on
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $8.3
  million, and adds $600,000 for a total of $8.9 million.
  o The  Senate  adds  $600,000  to  support  the  expansion  of
  investigations.
 
Judicial Nomination, Commission on
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $30,000, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Judicial Screening Committee
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $38,000 unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Justice Center for Protection of People with Special Needs
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $62.3 million, a decrease of $1.1 million or 1.8  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $799,000 unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8307-B)
  * PART CC -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to require  the
  Justice  Center  for  the Protection of People With Special Needs to
  notify the Office of Medicaid Inspector General of reports of  abuse
  or  neglect  when such reports are no longer subject to amendment or
  appeal.
 
Labor, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate accepts the All Funds recommendation of  $996.2  million,
  an increase of $12.34 million or 1.25 percent from SFY 2023-24.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $6.28
  billion, a decrease of $6.9 million or 0.1 percent from SFY  2023-24
  levels as follows:
  o Restores all Senate legislative adds totaling $22.79 million.
  o Adds $3 million for the Cornell Climate Jobs Institute.
  o Adds $2 million for the Cornell Cannabis Workforce Initiative.
  o Adds $300,000 for the Cornell Yang-Tan Institute.
  o Adds $300,000 for the Cornell Buffalo Co-Lab.
  o Adds $2.84 million for additional Senate legislative adds.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * PART  M  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to provide 40
  hours of paid family leave for employees to use on  prenatal  health
  to  change  the  leave  provided  from paid family leave to personal
  leave. The  Senate  supports  the  goal  of  this  proposal  but  is
  concerned about the impact it could have on the recognition of fetal
  personhood.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8306-B)
 
  * PART J -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to require paid
  breaks for breast milk expression in the workplace by increasing the
 
  paid  break  time  for  breast milk expression from 20 minutes to 30
  minutes.
  * PART  K  --  The Senate rejects the Executive proposal to remove the
  allowance of liquidated damages in instances where a  manual  worker
  is  paid  bi-weekly  instead  of weekly, as currently required under
  Labor Law. The Senate is open to further  discussing  the  issue  of
  liquidated damages in such instances.
  * PART  L  --  The  Senate  modifies  the Executive proposal to expand
  recovery tools for stolen wages to allow workers to seek an order of
  attachment against defendants on wage  theft  claims  and  to  allow
  workers  to  hold  shareholders  of non-publicly traded corporations
  personally liable  for  wage  theft  (S.7539)  and  to  establish  a
  dedicated,  recurring  revenue  stream  for Department of Labor wage
  enforcement purposes by utilizing resources the agency recovers from
  penalties imposed on employers found  in  violation  of  wage  theft
  provisions of the labor law (S.7818).
  * PART  M  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to sunset the
  State's COVID-19 Sick Leave Law on July 31, 2024, by continuing such
  benefits for  employees  that  work  in  facilities  licensed  under
  Article 28 of the Public Health Law.
  * NEW PART Y -- The Senate advances language to reduce the period from
  which  striking  workers  are  eligible  to  receive  unemployment
  insurance benefits as a result of a labor dispute from two weeks  to
  one week (S.4402).
  * NEW  PART  EEE  --  The  Senate advances language to make clarifying
  changes to the labor standards required for renewable energy  system
  projects  to  ensure  prevailing  wage  standards  and  labor  peace
  agreements are implemented.
 
Labor Management Committees
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs  with  the  All  Funds  recommendation  of  $48.8
  million, an increase of $11 million or 29 percent from SFY 2023-24.
 
Law, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $367
  million, and adds $4.6 million for a  total  of  $371.7  million  as
  follows:
  o The Senate adds $2.5 million to support Article VII new Part BB,
  which  establishes  the  New  York  Privacy  Act, as proposed in
  S.365-B.
  o The Senate adds $2.1 million to support additional  funding  for
  the Office of Special Investigation (OSI).
 
Capital Projects (S. 8004-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All Funds recommendation of $5
  million,  an  increase  of  $2.3  million  or  81.8 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8305-B)
  * PART O -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  prohibit  addictive social media feeds for minors without prejudice.
  The Senate strongly supports the need to add greater protections for
  minors against addictive  social  media  platforms  and  intends  to
  address the issue outside of the budget process.
 
  * PART P -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to restrict the
  collection  and  processing  of  data  of  minors  by  operators  of
  websites, online services and applications by making  technical  and
  clarifying changes consistent with the New York Privacy Act.
  * NEW  PART  BB  -- The Senate advances language to enact the New York
  Privacy Act to provide additional  disclosure  and  safeguards  with
  respect to how personal data is used and stored (S.365-B).
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * PART  JJ -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to expand the
  state's deceptive practices act to include unfair and  abusive  acts
  and  practices  by  replacing  it  with  (S.795)  with  additional
  provisions to provide  notice  and  time  to  cure,  and  by  adding
  provisions  related  to  factors  considered  when determining false
  advertisements for food  products  with  special  consideration  for
  advertising targeted to children (S.213-B).
 
Lieutenant Governor, Office of the
 
State Operations (S.7500-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $921,000, an increase of $175,000 or 23.5 percent from  SFY  2023-24
  levels.
 
Local Government Assistance
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $2.5 million for the Financial Restructuring Board,  unchanged  from
  SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate accepts the Executive All Funds recommendation of $807.3
  million and adds $210.9 million, for a total  of  $1.02  billion  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $210  million  for  Aid  and  Incentives  for
  Municipalities (AIM), distributed across current AIM recipients;
  with consideration on indexing  AIM  funding  to  inflation  and
  reinstating AIM to New York City.
  o The  Senate  adds $309,000 in Miscellaneous Financial Assistance
  for the Village of Washingtonville to cover the  costs  of  bond
  interest payments.
  o The  Senate  adds $300,000 in Miscellaneous Financial Assistance
  for the Village of New Paltz for police and  fire  services  for
  institutions of higher education.
  o The  Senate  adds  $250,000  for  the  Aid  and  Incentives  for
  Municipalities (AIM) Redesign Task Force. The task  force  would
  also make recommendations on AIM allocations for the City of New
  York.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8305-B)
  * PART  U  --  The  Senate modifies the Executive's proposal to sunset
  State matching funds for the County Wide Shared Services  Initiative
  to  ensure that outstanding projects and programs are not negatively
  impacted.
  * PART V -- The Senate modifies the Executive's proposal  to  increase
  the  Bonding  Limit  for  the  New  York  City  Transitional Finance
  Authority from $13.5 billion to  $19.5  billion  beginning  July  1,
 
  2024,  with  $288  million  being  dedicated to CUNY in 2024, and to
  $25.5 billion  beginning  July  1,  2025  with  $281  million  being
  dedicated  to  CUNY  in  2025.  Additionally,  the Senate makes such
  increases  contingent  on  the City of New York expanding the school
  construction capital plan and demonstrating the  plan's  achievement
  of class size reduction mandates.
  * PART W -- The Senate concurs with the Executive's proposal to expand
  the  Local  Government  Efficiency Grant programs with $8 million in
  funding; an increase of $4 million from SFY 2023-24 levels.
  * NEW PART FF -- The Senate advances language to make the state  lands
  of Sojourner Truth State Park and Franny Reese State Park subject to
  local taxation.
  * NEW  PART LL -- The Senate advances language to establish a New York
  Aid and Incentives for Municipalities  (AIM)  redesign  task  force,
  similar  to S.770. The task force would also make recommendations on
  AIM allocations for the City of New York.
 
Mental Health, Office of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $2.3  billion, an increase of $23.2 million, or one percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of  $2.93
  billion,  and  adds  $25.2  million  for a total of $2.95 billion as
  follows:
  o The Senate  adds  $15  million  for  Mental  Health  Legislative
  Grants.
  o The  Senate  adds  $5  million  for  Article VII proposal, Youth
  Mental  Health  Telehealth  Services  for  Youth  and  Children
  (S.8146).
  o The Senate adds $2 million for Daniel's Law Pilot Program grants
  for Crisis Intervention Services.
  o The  Senate  adds  $1 million for Mental Health Studies and Task
  Force bills.
  o The Senate adds $1 million for Sources of Strength.
  o The Senate adds $500,000 for CUNY School of  Public  Health  and
  Health  Policy  to  support  Harlem  Strong  Model Mental Health
  programs.
  o The  Senate  adds  $350,000  for  the  Veteran's  Mental  Health
  Training Initiative.
  o The  Senate  adds  $310,000 for the Joseph P. Dwyer Peer to Peer
  Services Program.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  *  The Senate concurs with the Executive All Funds recommendations  of
  $596.5  million,  a decrease of $864 million, or 59 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8307-B)
  * PART Y -- The Senate modifies the Executive  proposal  to  make  the
  Community  Mental  Health Support and Workforce Reinvestment Program
  permanent by extending the program an  additional  three  years  and
  requiring annual reporting of certain performance metrics.
  * PART  BB  --  The  Senate  modifies  the  Executive proposal to make
  Comprehensive Psychiatric Emergency Programs permanent by  extending
 
  the program an additional three years and requiring annual reporting
  of certain performance metrics.
 
Mental Hygiene, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $600
  million, and adds $360 million  for  a  total  of  $960  million  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $360  million  ($180  million State-Share) to
  support a 3.2 percent Human Services Cost of  Living  Adjustment
  (COLA).
  - The  Senate includes appropriations language to sub-allocate
  funding  to  any  relevant  state  agency  responsible  for
  administering  the  3.2  percent  Human  Services  COLA  as
  proposed in HMH Part FF (S.8307B).
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8307-B)
  * PART Z -- The Senate modifies the Executive  proposal  to  make  the
  authorization  for  certain  demonstration  programs  permanent  by
  extending the flexibilities an additional three years and  requiring
  annual reporting of certain performance metrics.
  * PART  AA  --  The  Senate  accepts the Executive proposal to require
  commercial insurance reimbursement  parity  for  certain  outpatient
  behavioral health services.
  * PART  DD  --  The  Senate accepts the Executive proposal to make the
  Representative Payee Authority for mental hygiene facility directors
  permanent.
  * PART FF -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  include  a
  Human  Services  Cost-of-Living  Adjustment  by  increasing  the
  percentage of this year's adjustment to 3.2 percent,  directing  the
  funds  for  direct salary support, and including programs previously
  excluded.
  * NEW PART SS -- The  Senate  advances  language  to  create  a  youth
  telehealth mental health services program (S.8146).
 
People with Developmental Disabilities, Office for
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $2.3 billion, an increase of $4.4 million or less than  one  percent
  from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $5.1
  billion, and adds $192 million  for  a  total  of  $5.3  billion  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $190  million  ($95  million  State-Share) to
  support  Article  VII  proposal  HMH,  S.837-B,  direct  support
  professional wage enhancements, consistent with S.4127-A
  o The Senate adds $1 million for Legislative Grants.
  o The Senate adds $700,000 related to the rejection of Article VII
  proposal,  HMH  Part EE which allows delegated nursing tasks for
  direct support staff in OPWDD Community Based Programs.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
 
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $139.4  million, an increase of $20 million or 16.7 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8307-B)
  * PART  EE -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  allow delegated nursing tasks for direct support staff in the Office
  for People with Developmental Disabilities community-based programs.
  * NEW PART UU -- The Senate advances provisions found in  S.4127-A  to
  establish a direct support wage enhancement to employees who provide
  direct  care  support  or any other form of treatment to individuals
  with developmental disabilities, whose income is less than $75,000.
 
Planning Council, Developmental Disabilities
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $4.8 million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Metropolitan Transportation Authority
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $873 million, a decrease of $19 million  or  2.1  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive All Funds recommendation of $68
  million, and adds $30 million for a total of $98 million as follows:
  o The Senate adds $30 million for the following:
  - $20 million for Metro-North for Hudson River Line resiliency
  projects.
  - $10 million for the environmental review of the Queens  Link
  project.
  o The  Senate  has  concerns  with  the  increasing  high-cost  of
  conducting studies for MTA projects. The Senate calls on the MTA
  to do more to reduce expenses on projects, as well  as  increase
  transparency  to the public as to how public resources are being
  utilized.
  o The Senate recommends the MTA include solutions to the  Nostrand
  Junction  bottleneck  as  well  as  station improvements at 74th
  Street and Jamaica-179th Street stations in Queens and the  East
  New  York  -  LIRR  station in Brooklyn in the 2026-2030 Capital
  Plan.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * PART A -- The Senate  modifies  the  Executive  proposal  to  extend
  tax-increment  financing  authority  for ten years by extending this
  authority for one year. The Senate will continue to  work  with  the
  MTA on improving its capital project efficiencies and transparency.
  * PART  B  --  The  Senate  rejects  without  prejudice  the Executive
  proposal to modify fare evasion penalties. The Senate recognizes the
  significant revenue losses the MTA is facing across the  system  and
  stands  ready  to  partner  on  solutions to improve education, fare
  collection, and service in an equitable manner.
  * PART D -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  establish criminal penalties for fraudulently attempting to obtain a
  congestion pricing or Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority credit,
 
  discount,  or  exemption  due  to  lack of certainty with respect to
  congestion pricing implementation.
  * NEW  PART  VV  --  The  Senate  advances the FARES Act, which adopts
  various public transportation discounts:
  o Expand the Fair Fares program to the commuter rails  within  New
  York City and require improved public outreach on the program.
  o Fund  a  weekly  CityTicket,  including transfers to subways and
  buses.
  o Provide AM peak fare discounts to seniors and  individuals  with
  disabilities across the MTA commuter rail system.
 
Military and Naval Affairs, Division of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $146.2 million, a decrease of $4 million or  2.6  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $5.5 million, an increase of $4 million  or  267  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $119.7
  million, as follows:
  o The  Senate  carves  out  $5 million for the Camp Smith Training
  Center
  o The  Senate  modifies  appropriation  language  to  require  the
  Division  of  Military  and  Naval  Affairs  to allocate funding
  pursuant to a plan approved by the Senate before Capital funding
  is spent.
 
Mortgage Agency (SONYMA)
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $76.8 million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $121.6 million, a decrease of $85.3 million or 41 percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 level.
 
Motor Vehicles, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $125.2 million, an increase of $3.5 million or 2.8 percent from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $24.9 million, a decrease  of  $400,000  or  1.6  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
 
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $514.9 million, an increase of $180.9 million or 54.2  percent  from
  SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8308-B)
  * PART  F -- The Senate accepts the Executive's proposal to extend the
  Internet Point Insurance Reduction Program, which allows  people  to
  take  defensive driving courses online, for two years until April 1,
  2026.
  * PART G -- The Senate accepts the Executive's proposal to extend  the
  distribution of Transportation and Transmission Tax revenues between
  upstate  (PTOA)  and downstate (MMTOA) transit operating systems and
  the authorization of the use of the  Dedicated  Highway  and  Bridge
  Trust  Fund  (DHBTF)  revenue  for DMV operations by two years until
  April 1, 2026.
  * PART H -- The Senate accepts the Executive's proposal  to  establish
  an  Online Insurance Verification System for motor vehicle insurance
  through the DMV.
  * PART J -- The Senate modifies the Executive's proposal to extend the
  DMV's authority to authorize Autonomous Vehicle testing until  April
  1,  2026  by  extending this authority for five years until April 1,
  2029.
  * PART K -- The Senate modifies the Executive's proposal to  create  a
  Stretch  Limousine  Passenger  Safety  Act by advancing the Senate's
  Stretch Limousine Passenger Safety Package which  includes  required
  safety  equipment  and features, mileage or age based phase outs for
  limousines, pre-trip safety briefings, an update to the limo  safety
  website, increased fines for operating a limo with an out of service
  defect,  and the extension of the Stretch Limousine Passenger Safety
  task force (S.1443-A,  S.1442,  S.1367,  S.1368,  S.1370-A,  S.1371,
  S.8376).
  * NEW  PART  GGG  --  The Senate advances a new proposal to reform the
  parking enforcement system in  the  City  of  New  York,  increasing
  penalties  on  commercial  vehicles that illegally park overnight in
  residential areas or leave trailers unattended, as well as modifying
  the adjudicatory and enforcement processes.
  * The Senate additionally supports extending  the  school  bus  camera
  enforcement  program  authorization,  which  helps keep our children
  safe from the dangers of  vehicles  illegally  over-passing  stopped
  school buses.
 
National And Community Service
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $30.5 million, an increase  of  $89,000  or  .30  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $489,000, an increase of $32,000  or  7  percent  from  SFY  2023-24
  levels.
 
Olympic Regional Development Authority
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $14.1 million, which is consistent with SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $82.5
  million, a decrease of $7.5 million, or 8 percent from  SFY  2023-24
  levels  by  providing  that Belleayre Mountain Ski Center receive at
  least $15 million.
 
Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $386.4  million, an increase of $26.7 million, or 7 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $26.6  million,  an increase of $15 million, or 129 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $622.4  million,
  and adds $63 million, for a total of $675.4 billion, as follows:
  o The Senate restores $10 million for zoos, botanical gardens, and
  aquaria.
  o The Senate adds $53 million for the following:
  - $50 million for infrastructure projects at State parks.
  - $3 million for the Adirondack Experience project.
  o Expands  allowable  purposes  of the NY SWIMS program to provide
  funding for natural swimming areas.
 
Power Authority, New York
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $54  million,  an increase of $46.5 million, or 620 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * New Part FFF -- The Senate advances language  to  direct  the  Canal
  Corporation  to  create  a  chart  of the Oswego river basin and the
  Mohawk river basin normal and flood water flows (S.7641).
 
Prevention of Domestic Violence, Office for the
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All Funds recommendation of $6
  million, an increase of $1 million or 21 percent  from  SFY  2023-24
  levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $11.8
  million by adding $5  million  for  a  total  of  $16.8  million  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  adds  $5  million  for  Domestic  Violence  Service
  Providers grants for a total of $10 million.
 
Prosecutorial Conduct, Commission on
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
 
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $1.75 million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Public Employment Relations Board
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $5.9 million, an increase of $963,000 or 18 percent from SFY 2023-24
  levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $2.5  million  for  the  modernization  program  of SFY 2022-23 that
  becomes a reappropriation this year.
 
Public Service, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $141.7  million,  an  increase  of  $29.9 million, or 27 percent SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $55.8
  million,  a decrease of $150 million, or 73 percent from SFY 2023-24
  levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * Part O -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal  to  enact  the
  Renewable  Action  Through  Project  Interconnection  and Deployment
  (RAPID)  Act  by  adding  language  on  additional  reporting  and
  oversight, mitigation of negative impact on prime agricultural lands
  and  other  protected  areas,  and to include stand-alone commercial
  scale battery storage siting.
  * Part P  --  The  Senate  rejects  the  Executive  proposal  for  the
  Affordable  Gas  Transition Act (AGTA), and replaces it with the New
  York Home Energy Affordable Transition Act (NY HEAT Act) (S.2016B).
  * Part Q -- The Senate  modifies  the  Executive  proposal  to  extend
  assessments  on  cable  television companies and public utilities to
  cover expenses  of  various  agencies  to  April  1,  2029  by  only
  extending this assessment by one year to April 1, 2025.
  * New  Part  CCC -- The Senate advances language to require the Public
  Service Commission and Department of Environmental  Conservation  to
  conduct  regular  audits  of  regulated  private  water  utilities
  (S.1791).
 
State, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $192.3
  million, and adds $19.5 million for a total of $211.8 as follows:
  o The Senate adds $21.0 million for the following:
  - $10 million for the  Commission  to  Study  Reparations  and
  Social Justice (Chapter 729 of the Laws of 2023).
  - $5 million for the Office of Native American Affairs.
  - $5  million  for  the  Office  of  Racial  Equity and Social
  Justice.
 
  - $1 million  for  the  Authorities  Budget  Office  (ABO)  to
  support (S.1737 Krueger).
  o The Senate removes $1.5 million for the following:
  - $1.5  million  for  the  Office  of  Faith  and  Non-Profit
  Development Services.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $278.9
  million, and adds $61.8 million for a total  of  $340.7  million  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  restores  and  increases  $65.3  million  for  the
  following:
  - $30 million for additional appropriations for the Office for
  New Americans  for  job  training/placement  services,  case
  management  services,  and  English  as  a  second  language
  services.
  - $30 million for Asian American Pacific Islanders (AAPI)  for
  combating biased based crimes, crisis intervention services,
  and an AAPI Community Development Fund.
  - $3 million for the New York State Immigration Coalition.
  - $2.25 million for the Public Utility Law Project (PULP).
  - $75,000 for the New York Legal Assistance Group.
  o The Senate removes $3.5 million for the following:
  - $3.5  million  for  the  Office  of  Faith  and  Non-Profit
  Development Services.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $212  million,  an  increase  of $10 million or 5.0 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * NEW PART GG -- The Senate  advances  language  that  requires  every
  state  agency,  board, or commission, that collects demographic data
  on ancestry or ethnic origin, add and use  separate  collection  and
  tabulation  categories  for  North African and Middle Eastern groups
  (S.6584-B)
  * NEW PART RR -- The Senate advances language creating the  Office  of
  Racial  Equity  and  Social  Justice  to serve as the official State
  planning and coordinating office  for  changes  in  race  or  social
  justice  policies,  practices,  and  in  the  allocation  of  State
  resources (S.1359).
  * NEW PART VV -- The Senate advances language establishing the  Office
  of Native American Affairs to act as a centralized office for Native
  American  nations  to  access information on State programs that are
  applicable to Native Americans (S.8435).
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8308-B)
  * Part GG -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal  to
  require  certification  for  distribution, assembly, reconditioning,
  sale of lithium-ion batteries and second-use  lithium-ion  batteries
  as S.154-E addresses this issue.
  * PART  KK  --  The  Senate  modifies the Executive proposal to extend
  videoconferencing authority for two years by including  language  to
  lower the in person requirements for all advisory boards.
  * PART  MM -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal on
  Artificial Intelligence-based deceptive  practices  and  intends  to
  address the issue outside of the budget process.
 
State Police, Division of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $1.09
  billion, and subtracts $17.8 million for a total of $1.07 billion as
  follows:
  o The Senate transfers $17.8 million to the Division  of  Criminal
  Justice  Services  to  support local assistance grants for State
  and Local Law Enforcement.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $144.9
  million, and subtracts $7.4 million for a total of $137.5 million as
  follows:
  o The Senate transfers $7.4 million to the  Division  of  Criminal
  Justice Services to support local assistance grants to State and
  Local Law Enforcement.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * NEW  PART  XX  --  The  Senate  advances  language  that statutorily
  establishes a retail crime task  force.  The  task  force  would  be
  authorized  to  support  and  assist  localities  with  retail theft
  incidents, if requested, create a  centralized  information  sharing
  system  to  share  real-time  intelligence/data on retail crime, and
  investigate large scale organized retail theft occurring between two
  or more counties.
 
State University of New York (SUNY)
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of  $11.7
  billion  and  adds  $192.3  million  for a total of $11.9 billion as
  follows:
  o The Senate restores $71 for the following
  - $69 million for hospital debt service.
  - $1.3 million for the Educational Opportunity Program.
  - $350,000 for the SUNY Black Leadership Institute.
  - $150,000 for the Benjamin Center at SUNY New Paltz.
  o The Senate adds $121.5 million for the following:
  - $100 million for the SUNY operational funding.
  - $10.1 million for hospital debt service
  - $5  million  for  the  School  of  Environmental  Science  &
  Forestry.
  - $5 million for SUNY Maritime Scholarships.
  - $1 million for the UB Law School Public Policy Institute.
  - $350,000 for the Asian Leadership Institute.
  o Modifies  the  $100  million  in  operating  assistance  to SUNY
  Downstate to continue current services while the State pursues a
  commissioned  report  evaluating  SUNY  Downstate's  healthcare
  services to ensure accessibility, equity, and sustainability.
  o The  Senate  intentionally  omits $2.5 million for the Empire AI
  Consortium.
  * The Senate supports additional financial resources if needed to fund
  collective bargaining agreements.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
 
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All funds recommendation  of  $445
  million  and  adds  $1.7  million  for  a  total  of $447 million as
  follows:
  o The  Senate  restores  $1.7  million for the Cornell Cooperative
  Extension.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $1.2
  billion and adds $820 million for a total of $2 billion as follows:
  o The Senate restores $820 million for the following:
  - $670 million for senior college capital.
  - $150 million for hospital capital.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8306-B)
  * New  Part X -- The Senate advances language to codify the SUNY Black
  Leadership Institute (S.4743).
  * New Part JJ -- The Senate advances language to require  the  use  of
  project labor agreements (PLA) for large scale construction projects
  and  projects  involving  construction, rehab, or improvement of any
  facility on the campus valued at $3 million or more (amended version
  of S.6050).
  * New  Part  KK  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  establish  a
  Commission  tasked  with  evaluating  SUNY  Downstate's  healthcare
  services to ensure accessibility, equity, and sustainability,  while
  safeguarding core health care services. The Commission shall issue a
  report with recommendations due by December 31, 2024. Implementation
  of  these  recommendations by the Department of Health is contingent
  upon legislative approval or rejection by February 1, 2025.
 
Statewide Financial System
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  All  Funds  appropriation
  recommendation of $32 million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Tax Appeals, Division of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  All  Funds appropriation
  recommendation of $4 million,  an  increase  of  $669,600,  or  16.6
  percent, from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Taxation and Finance, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $499.1 million, an increase of $27.2 million, or  5.5  percent  from
  SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $7.9 million which is consistent with SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Temporary and Disability Assistance, Office of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
 
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $512.3  million, an increase of $46.7 million or 10 percent from SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $9.5
  billion, and adds $260.3 million for a  total  of  $9.6  billion  as
  follows:
  o The Senate restores $18.3 million for the following:
  - $8  million  in  additional  support  for  the  Refugee
  Resettlement Program, for a total of $10 million.
  - $4 million in TANF for ATTAIN.
  - $2  million  in  additional  support  for  the  Nutritional
  Outreach  and  Education Program (NOEP), for a total of $5.5
  million.
  - $2 million for the Double Up Food Bucks program.
  - $1.5  million  in  additional  support  for  the  Disability
  Advocacy Program (DAP), for a total of $6.75 million.
  - $800,000 in TANF for the Welfare to Careers Program.
  o The Senate adds $192 million for the following:
  - $50  million  in TANF for increased public assistance access
  and support for individuals at risk of eviction.
  - $50 million  to  establish  the  NYS  SNAP  Minimum-Benefits
  program,  ensuring families receive a minimum benefit of $50
  per month.
  - $32 million  in  additional  support  for  STEPH/NYSSHP/OSAH
  programs  to  increase  reimbursement  rates, for a total of
  $85.9 million.
  - $20 million for Legal Service Representation  for  Evictions
  in NYC.
  - $12  million  for  the  Mothers  and  Infants Lasting Change
  Allowance.
  - $10 million for Legal Services NYCs Eviction Prevention  and
  Housing Stability Program.
  - $10  million in additional support to consolidate the Summer
  Youth Employment  Program  (SYEP),  for  a  total  of  $60.4
  million. Funding will support additional slots for youths.
  - $8.9  million  for  Legal  Services  of  the  Hudson  Valley
  Eviction Prevention.
  - $5  million  in  additional  support  for  Legal  Service
  Representation for Evictions outside NYC, for a total of $40
  million.
  - $1.5 million for National Diaper Banks.
  - $20  million  for  a  statewide  thirty  percent cap on rent
  contributions for HIV-positive individuals, for part  CC  of
  ELFA.
  - $11.5  million  for an allowance for the cost of diapers for
  part BB of ELFA.
  - $2 million for the New York Healthy Incentive  Program,  for
  part AA of ELFA.
  - $500,000  for a study on the public benefits cliff, for part
  EE of ELFA.
  - $8.6 million to support legislative initiatives.
  o The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to provide $50 million
  in TANF funding for the Anti-Poverty Initiative in three  cities
  (Rochester,  $25  million;  Buffalo $12.25 million; and Syracuse
  $12.25 Million). The Senate recognizes that other parts  of  the
 
  State  are  experiencing  extreme  poverty  and  also  require
  additional resources.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $128
  million, which is consistent with SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8306-B)
  * Part H -- The Senate accepts the Executive  proposal  to  raise  the
  Personal  Needs  Allowance  and  standard  of  monthly  need  for
  determining eligibility  for  Public  Assistance  and  a  number  of
  additional state payments.
  * Part  I  --  The  Senate accepts the Executive proposal to amend the
  Family Court Act and the Domestic Relations Law to  bring  New  York
  state  into  compliance  with  federal  regulations related to child
  support payments.
  * NEW PART AA -- The Senate advances language to direct the Office  of
  Temporary  and  Disability  Assistance  to  establish  the  New York
  Healthy Incentive Program which  will  provide  earned  dollars  for
  Supplemental  Nutrition Assistance Program beneficiaries to spend on
  local healthy food (S.3069-A).
  * NEW PART BB -- The Senate advances language to permit  local  social
  services  districts to administer allowances for the cost of diapers
  to eligible families with children two years or younger (S.1210).
  * NEW PART CC -- The Senate advances language  to  require  all  local
  social  services  districts  in  New  York State to provide a thirty
  percent  rental  contribution  cap  for  all  individuals  that  are
  HIV-positive and living on public assistance (S.183).
  * NEW  PART  EE  --  The  Senate advances language to establish a task
  force to study fiscal cliffs in New York state's  Public  Assistance
  program and make recommendations to reduce and eliminate such fiscal
  cliffs (S.7830-A).
  * NEW  PART  OO -- The Senate advances language to increase the income
  threshold to 400 percent  of  the  Federal  Poverty  Level  for  the
  one-time,  six-month  earned  income disregard for public assistance
  recipients who enter a job after completing an  employment  training
  program (amended version of S.8374).
  * NEW  PART  VV  --  The Senate advances language to require temporary
  housing facilities offer high  speed  broadband  internet  and  WiFi
  access to all residents (S.4561-A).
  * NEW  PART  BBB  --  The  Senate  advances  language creating a pilot
  program which will provide 1,000 participants an unconditional  cash
  allowance  during  the  final  three  months of pregnancy which will
  continue until the child born of that pregnancy reaches 9 months  of
  age (amended version of S.4578-A).
  * NEW  PART  FFF  -- The Senate advances language establishing a state
  SNAP  minimum  benefit  program  to  provide  the  difference  in  a
  household's  federal  SNAP  benefit  and  $50.00 (amended version of
  S.7663-A).
 
Thruway Authority
 
Aid to Localities (S. 8303-B)
  * The Senate supports the expansion of the Governor  Cuomo/Tappan  Zee
  Bridge Resident Discount Program to include Orange County residents.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
 
  * PART C -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to create a new
  mechanism  for DMV to block the registration of a vehicle based on a
  toll-related  offense,  increase  penalties  for  license  plate
  concealment,  and  authorize  law enforcement to seize license plate
  obstructing  materials  by replacing it with the Senate's Toll Payer
  Protection Act (S.492-A) and include a ban on the  sale  of  "vanish
  plates" and an additional penalty for fraudulent paper plates.
 
Transportation, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $500.9 million, an increase of $5.7 million or 1.1 percent from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $5.3
  billion, and adds $230.2 million for a  total  of  $5.5  billion  as
  follows:
  o The Senate adds $230.2 million for the following:
  - $79.6  million  in  additional  support  for STOA funding to
  non-MTA transit systems to provide a  15%  increase,  for  a
  total of $5.2 billion.
  - $45 million for the MTA to increase bus service frequency.
  - $45  million  for  the  MTA's Fare-Free Bus Pilot to support
  three additional bus routes per borough.
  - $40 million for the expansion of MTA's City  Ticket  program
  and reduced AM fares for seniors.
  - $20 million for a municipal project study fund to provide up
  to  $125,000  per grant to municipalities for road condition
  studies.
  - $625,000 for the Governor's Island seasonal  Brooklyn  ferry
  service.
  o The  Senate  supports  non-MTA  transit  systems  developing and
  expanding Fare-Free bus pilots.
 
Capital Projects (S8004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation  of  $9.4  billion,
  and adds $1.2 billion for a total of $10.6 billion as follows:
  o The Senate adds $1.2 billion for the following:
  - $400 million in additional support for core highway funding,
  for  a  total  of $3 billion. $100 million of the additional
  support  will  go  to  region  8  to  compensate  for  past
  underfunding.
  - $160  million  in  additional  support  for the Consolidated
  Local Highway Improvement Program (CHIPS), for  a  total  of
  $698.1 million.
  - $90  million  in additional support for State Touring Routes
  (STR), for a total of $190 million.
  - $50  million  in  additional  support  for  Extreme  Winter
  Recovery (EWR), for a total of $150 million.
  - $27.5 million in additional support for the Aviation Capital
  Grant Program, for a total of $40 million.
  - $23.7  million  in  support  for  the  first  year  of a new
  five-year capital plan for the NFTA, totaling  $131  million
  over the five years.
  - $20  million  in  additional  support  for  non-MTA  capital
  funding, for a total of $159.5 million.
 
  - $15 million to support the  maintenance  of  State  Arterial
  Roads.
  - $2.5  million  for state maintenance cost for Ridge Road and
  South Park Avenue in the City of Lackawanna  for  TEDE  Part
  BBB.
  - $250 million for Round 3 of the Airport Economic Development
  and  Revitalization Initiative for airports outside New York
  City.
  - $100 million for Multi-Modal discretionary funding
  - $55.5 million to support the following:
  * $15 million for the Rochester Intermodal Station.
  * $20 million for engineering costs of NYS Route 9A.
  * $20 million to renovate Brookeville Blvd.
  * $500,000 for the Town of Plattekill for a culvert replacement.
  - $28 million to support studies for the following:
  * $15 million for connecting the Cross  Island  Parkway  to  the  Belt
  Parkway
  * $10 million for Higher-speed rail.
  * $3  million  for  a  study  on  the  creation of a Mid-Hudson Valley
  Transportation Authority.
  - The  Senate  provides  additional  language  requiring  the
  Gateway  Development  Commission as part of the Hudson River
  Casing Project to study the Secaucus-Loop project, while the
  casing project is ongoing.
  - The Senate supports providing a commitment  letter  for  the
  state  share  of  costs  ($700  million) associated with the
  Amherst Light Rail Expansion.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * PART E -- The Senate accepts the Executive's proposal to modify  the
  CDTA's  local  match  percentages  to  accommodate  Warren  County's
  contribution to and participation in the system.
  * PART I -- The Senate modifies the Executive's proposal to  authorize
  the City of New York to lower citywide speed limits from its current
  authorization of 25 miles per hour down to 20 miles per hour, and to
  lower school zone speed limits and traffic calming "slow zones" from
  15  miles  per hour to 10 miles per hour, to replace it with Sammy's
  Law (S.2422-B).
  * NEW PART WW -- The Senate advances language to  require  all  public
  transit  operators  that  receive  State assistance to purchase only
  zero-emissions buses and  related  equipment  beginning  January  1,
  2029.  This  legislation  also  requires  a  best-value  contracting
  framework to evaluate bids to promote higher wages and benefits  and
  requires the development of a plan to train or retrain impacted auto
  workers (S.6089).
  * NEW  PART  ZZ  -- The Senate advances language to create a dedicated
  revenue  stream  to  support  the  Statewide  Mass  Transportation
  Operating Assistance fund for transit systems outside the MTA region
  by adding a $1 assessment on transportation network company rides.
  * NEW PART BBB -- The Senate advances language to designate South Park
  Avenue  and  portions  of  Ridge Road in the City of Lackawanna as a
  State Highway, dedicating its  maintenance  to  the  DOT  (S.1357  &
  S.1358).
  * NEW  PART  EEE  --  The Senate advances language to require New York
  City to establish scramble crosswalks between the hours of  8AM  and
  4PM near school zones on weekdays (S.2515-C).
 
Veterans' Affairs, Department of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $14.1 million, an increase of $1  million  or  8  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $12.4
  million, an adds $4 million for a total of $16.4 million as follows:
  o The Senate restores $1.48 million for the following:
  - $500,000 for  the  New  York  State  Defenders  Associations
  Veteran Defense Program (VDP).
  - $450,000  for  the  New  York  State  Defenders Associations
  Veteran Defense Program (VDP) - Long Island Expansion.
  - $300,000 for New York Helmets to Hardhats.
  - $225,000 for Legal Services of the Hudson Valleys -- Veteran
  and Military Families.
  o The Senate adds $2.55 million for the following:
  - $800,000 for SAGE
  - $250,000 to support the Alex R. Jimenez legacy  program  for
  Part PP of ELFA
  - $1.5 million to support legislative initiatives.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All Funds recommendation of $4
  million, which is consistent with SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8306-B)
  * NEW PART PP -- The Senate advances language to establish the Alex R.
  Jimenez  legacy program to assist uniform service members, veterans,
  reserve component members, and  their  families  in  securing  legal
  immigration status in the United States (S.8119).
 
Victim Services, Office of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $26 million, an increase of $7.5 million  or  40  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $336.7
  million, as follows:
  o The  Senate  modifies  the  Victim  of  Crime  Act (VOCA) grants
  appropriation language to allocate funding pursuant  to  a  plan
  approved by the Legislature
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $4.1 million, an increase of $2.6 million or 173  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 levels.
 
Waterfront Commission
 
State Operation (S. 8300-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the  Executive All Funds recommendation of $5
  million, and subtracts $2.47 million for a total of  $  2.5  million
  for the operations of the Waterfront Commission.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * PART  L -- The Senate modifies the Executive's proposal to establish
  a  New  York  Waterfront  Commission  by  extending  the  temporary
  authorization  for  the  existing governmental structure to June 30,
  2025.
 
Workers' Compensation Board
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $227.2
  million, an increase of $14.9 million by adding $149 million  for  a
  total of $376.2 million to include the following:
  o $114 million to support the implementation of S.8445-A/Ramos.
  o $35  million  to  support  the  implementation  of  the Senate's
  Short-Term Disability Leave Benefits proposal.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8305-B)
  * PART N -- The Senate modifies the  Executive  proposal  to  increase
  short-term  disability  leave benefits by implementing a progressive
  benefit structure over  a  three-year  period  and  amends  employee
  contributions  provided that in no case shall employee contributions
  exceed $2.20 per week. The Senate also temporarily  exempts  workers
  and  employers  covered by a current collective bargaining agreement
  (CBA) until the expiration of such  agreement  (amended  version  of
  S.2821-B).
  * NEW  PART  III  --  The  Senate advances language to expand workers'
  compensation  coverage  for  work-related  post-traumatic  stress
  disorder (S.6635).
 
Article VII Proposals (S.8306-B)
  * NEW  PART Z -- The Senate advances language to allow either party to
  a Workers' Compensation claim to request a hearing and to require  a
  record of all hearings held (S.8445-A).
 
Welfare Inspector General, Office of
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $1.4 million, an increase  of  $53,000  or  3.97  percent  from  SFY
  2023-24 Levels.
 
Miscellaneous Appropriations, Data Analytics
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $50 million in reappropriation authority, unchanged from SFY 2023-24
  levels.
 
Miscellaneous Appropriations,  Insurance  and  Securities  Fund  Reserve
Guarantee
 
State Operations (S8300-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $1.6 billion, unchanged from SFY 2023-24.
 
Miscellaneous Appropriations, Special Federal Emergency
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
 
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of  $7
  billion, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels, as follows:
  o The  Senate  modifies  the appropriation language to require the
  approval of the Temporary President of the Senate and Speaker of
  the Assembly before appropriations can  be  utilized  after  the
  budget is enacted.
 
Miscellaneous Appropriations, Special Emergency
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the  Executive All Funds recommendation of $2
  billion, and subtracts $1 billion, for a  total  of  $1  billion  as
  follows:
  o The  Senate reduces the appropriation by $1 billion to an amount
  consistent with the funding level prior to the pandemic.
  o The Senate modifies the appropriation language  to  require  the
  approval of the Temporary President of the Senate and Speaker of
  the  Assembly  before  appropriations  can be utilized after the
  budget is enacted.
 
Miscellaneous Appropriations, Public Security and Emergency Response
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $500 million, unchanged from SFY 2023-24 levels.
 
Miscellaneous Appropriations, State Equipment Finance Program
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $100 million, which is consistent with SFY 2023-24.
 
Miscellaneous Items
 
State Operations (S.8300-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $292.4  million  for Health Insurance Reserve Receipts Fund which is
  consistent with SFY 2023-24.
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $773.8  million  for  Health  Insurance Contingency Reserve which is
  consistent with SFY 2023-24.
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $9.5  million  for  the  Workers'  Compensation  Reserve  which  is
  consistent with SFY 2023-24.
 
Aid to Localities (S.8303-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $250 million for Raise the Age, which is consistent with SFY 2023-24
  levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.8304-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $50 million for sustainability projects.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8308-B)
  * PART W -- The  Senate  intentionally  omits  without  prejudice  the
  Executive proposal to increase the bond cap of the Battery Park City
  Authority.  The  Senate  supports the need for greater investment in
 
  coastal resiliency and flood risk management in Battery  Park  City,
  but more information about the project plan and funding is needed.
  * NEW  PART  OO  --  The Senate advances language to repeal provisions
  restricting the legal authority of members of the Public Authorities
  Control Board in evaluating publicly financed projects (S.8142).
  * NEW PART PP -- The Senate advances language to increase transparency
  and accountability for local economic development entities by:
  o Creating  a  searchable  database  of  subsidy  and  economic
  development benefits provided by local authorities (S.1737).
  o Extending  the  applicability  of  Open  Meetings and Freedom of
  Information  Laws  to  public  or  quasi-public  not-for-profit
  corporations (S.2727A).
  o Authorizing  county  comptrollers  to  examine  Industrial
  Development  Agencies  and  local  development  corporations
  (S.2297).
  o Granting  the  Authorities  Budget Office additional enforcement
  powers to prevent unauthorized activity and  willful  submission
  of false financial reports (S.6746).
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8305-B)
  * PART  X  --  The  Senate modifies the Executive's proposal regarding
  sweeps  and  transfers  to  account  for  spending  changes  and
  intentionally  omits  the Executive proposals to codify the scope of
  the  Office  of  State  Comptroller  (OSC)  "terms  and  conditions"
  approval  of  Personal  Income Tax and Sales Tax Revenue Bonds sales
  issued on a negotiated basis and make  permanent  the  authority  to
  issue up to $4 billion in short-term personal income tax notes.
 
Revenue
 
Article VII Proposal (S.8309-A)
  * PART  A -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to permanently
  extend the charitable itemized deduction  limit  by  extending  this
  limit by five years.
  * PART  B -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to permanently
  extend the tax shelter provisions by extending these  provisions  by
  five years.
  * PART  C  --  The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to make
  technical corrections to the  Metropolitan  Commuter  Transportation
  Mobility Tax.
  * PART  D  --  The  Senate accepts the Executive proposal to close the
  amended  return  loophole  for  Personal  Income  and  Corporation
  Franchise Taxes.
  * PART  E  --  The  Senate accepts the proposal to create a Commercial
  Security Tax Credit program.
  * PART F -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  permanently
  extend  the  electronic  filing and payment mandate by extending the
  mandate by five years.
  * PART G -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  permanently
  extend  the  authorization to manage delinquent sales tax vendors by
  extending this authorization by five years.
  * PART H -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to  provide  for
  the filing of Amended Sales Tax Return.
  * PART  I  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to extend for
  three years the sales tax exemptions connected  to  the  Dodd  Frank
  Protection  Act  to  extend these provisions for one year and to add
  language  requiring  that  the  cost  of  this  tax  expenditure  be
 
  calculated and reported to the Governor and the Legislature prior to
  next year's budget deadline.
  * PART  J  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to extend the
  sales tax exemption for vending machines for one year.
  * PART K -- The Senate modifies the Executive  proposal  to  modernize
  the  vacation  rental industry by replacing the Executive's language
  with language which creates  a  statewide  registry  of  short  term
  rentals, while allowing localities to maintain their own registries,
  and  imposes  the  sales  tax and hotel and motel occupancy taxes on
  short term rentals (S.885-B).
  * PART L -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  repeal  and
  replace  the  cannabis  potency  tax with language which phases in a
  permanent rate for the new wholesale tax over  a  multi-year  period
  (S.4831-B).
  * PART  M  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  clarify the Telecommunications Assessment Ceiling Program.
  * PART N -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal creating a  new
  process  for distribution of surplus proceeds related to the auction
  of  properties  subject  to  foreclosure  by  adding  a  variety  of
  homeowner protections.
  * NEW  PART  S  -- The Senate advances language to fully de-couple New
  York from the Qualified Opportunity Zones program and to tax capital
  gains from investments in these zones in the same  manner  as  other
  capital gains are taxed (S.543-A).
  * NEW  PART T -- The Senate advances language ending the sales and use
  tax exemption for the cost of a boat above $230,000 (S.2557).
  * NEW PART U -- The Senate advances language ending the sales and  use
  tax exemption for private aircraft (S.2556).
  * NEW  PART  V -- The Senate advances language requiring vapor product
  distributors to be licensed by the State and gives the Department of
  Taxation and Finance the power to enforce the collection  of  excise
  taxes on vaping products (S.8559).
  * NEW  PART W -- The Senate advances language to repeal the excise tax
  on medical cannabis (S.5365).
  * NEW PART X -- The Senate advances language  to  expand  the  maximum
  credit  for  the solar energy system equipment credit from $5,000 to
  $10,000, to allow the credit to include  costs  of  storage  systems
  installed,  to make the credit refundable for low to moderate income
  taxpayers  or  individuals  living  in  disadvantaged  communities
  (S.3596-C).
  * NEW  PART  Y  --  The Senate advances language to expand the maximum
  credit for geothermal energy systems  expenditures  from  $5,000  to
  $10,000 and to make the credit refundable for low to moderate income
  taxpayers  or  individuals  living  in  disadvantaged  communities
  (S.8106).
  * NEW  PART  Z  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  exempt  the
  installation  of  residential  energy storage systems from the sales
  and use tax (based on S.4547).
  * NEW PART AA -- The Senate advances  language  to  make  programmatic
  changes  to  the  digital gaming media production credit to make the
  credit more effective (based on S.6997-A).
  * NEW PART BB -- The Senate  advances  language  to  exempt  nonprofit
  carshare  organizations  from  the  supplemental  car  rental  tax
  (S.7848).
  * NEW PART CC -- The Senate advances language to increase the value of
  the volunteer firefighter and ambulance workers credit to $800  from
  the current $200 (based on S.7286).
 
  * NEW PART DD -- The Senate advances language to increase the personal
  income  tax rates for filers making over $5 million but not over $25
  million from 10.3 to 10.8 percent and for  filers  making  over  $25
  million from 10.9 to 11.4 percent for Tax Years 2024 through 2027.
  * NEW  PART  EE -- The Senate advances language creating a payroll tax
  credit  for  independently  owned  media  entities  employing  news
  journalists  of  100  or  fewer  employees,  capped  at  $20 million
  annually (S.625-C).
  * NEW PART FF -- The Senate advances language creating a state version
  for the working opportunities  tax  credit,  capped  at  $5  million
  (based on S4833-A).
  * NEW  PART  GG  -- The Senate advances language to remove a number of
  tax breaks for the use of fossil fuels and dedicates  revenues  from
  the  taxation of aviation fuel back to airport capital and operating
  expenses (based on S.3389).
  * NEW PART HH -- The  Senate  advances  language  creating  a  Working
  Families  Tax  Credit  that would provide a $550 credit per child to
  single taxpayers making under $75,000 and married  taxpayers  filing
  jointly  making  $130,000.  Taxpayers with higher incomes would see
  the value of the credit decline by $20 for each $1,000 of additional
  income over these levels. This new credit would replace the existing
  Empire State Child Credit, providing a more generous  credit  (based
  on S.277-A).
  * NEW PART II -- The Senate advances language increasing the Corporate
  Franchise  tax  rate  for companies with a net business income of $5
  million or above to 9 percent for Tax Years before 2027. The  Senate
  will  advocate  for the use of additional revenue from the corporate
  franchise tax surcharge to provide significant relief to the state's
  Unemployment Insurance fund.  Simultaneous  with  that  relief,  the
  Senate  supports  restarting  the scheduled increases to the maximum
  weekly benefit  for  unemployed  workers.  Maximum  benefits  should
  increase  to eventually achieve half of the state median income over
  a reasonable time-frame, and  should  reach  no  less  than  44%  of
  average weekly wages by 2026.
  * NEW  PART  JJ  --  The  Senate  advances language extending the real
  property  tax  relief  credit  for  three  years  and  expanding
  eligibility.