# Senate budget resolution in response to the 2023-2024 Executive Budget submission

**Bill ID:** R555
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrea Stewart-Cousins
**Status:** Adopted
**PDF:** [R555 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/R555)

---

## Full Text

Senate Resolution No. 555
 
BY: Senator STEWART-COUSINS
 
  RESOLUTION  in  response  to the 2023-2024 Executive
  Budget  submission  (Legislative  Bills  S.4000-A,
  S.4001,  S.4002,  S.4003-A,  S.4004-A,  S.4005-A,
  S.4006-A,  S.4007-A,  S.4008-A,  S.4009-A)  to  be
  adopted  as  legislation  expressing the position of
  the New York State Senate relating to the  2023-2024
  New York State Budget
 
WHEREAS,  It  is  the  intent  of  the Senate to effectuate the timely
passage of a State Budget; and
 
WHEREAS, It is the intent of  the  Senate  to  engage  in  the  Budget
Conference  Committee process, which promotes increased participation by
the members of the Legislature and the public; and
 
WHEREAS, The Senate Finance Committee has conducted an extensive study
and review of the Governor's 2023-2024 Executive Budget  submission  and
has  recommended  proposed  amendments  to such Budget submission in the
above referenced Legislative Bills and Report on the  Executive  Budget;
and
 
WHEREAS,  Article  VII of the New York State Constitution provides the
framework under which the New York State Budget  is  submitted,  amended
and  enacted.  The New York State Courts have limited the Legislature in
how it may change the appropriations bills submitted  by  the  Governor.
The Legislature can delete or reduce items of appropriation contained in
the several appropriation bills submitted by the Governor in conjunction
with  the  Executive  Budget,  and  it  can  add  additional  items  of
appropriation to those bills provided that  such  additions  are  stated
separately  and distinctly from the original items of the bill and refer
each to a single object or purpose; and
 
WHEREAS, An extensive study and review  of  the  Governor's  2023-2024
Executive  Budget  submission  has revealed that the construction of the
budget bills submitted to the Legislature by the Governor constrains the
Legislature in its ability to fully effectuate its  intent  in  amending
the Governor's budget submission; and
 
WHEREAS,  The  Senate  has  amended the Governor's 2023-2024 Executive
Budget submission to the fullest extent possible  within  the  authority
provided  to  it  pursuant  to  Section 4 of Article VII of the New York
State Constitution; and
 
WHEREAS, The Senate, in addition to the Governor's 2023-2024 Executive
Budget submission bills as amended by the Senate in the above referenced
legislative  bills,  does  hereby  provide  its  recommendations  as  to
provisions in the Governor's 2023-2024 Executive Budget submission which
reflect  those  items  the  Senate  is  constrained from effectuating as
amendments to the 2023-2024 Executive Budget appended hereto; and
 
WHEREAS, It is the intent of the Senate that upon the passage  of  the
Governor's  2023-2024  Executive  Budget  submission  as  amended by the
 
Senate, the incorporated Report on  the  Amended  Executive  Budget  may
provide a basis for both houses of the Legislature to convene Committees
on  Conference pursuant to Joint Rule III of the Senate and Assembly for
the purpose of reconciling any differences between the amendments to the
Governor's  budget  as  proposed  by each house of the Legislature; now,
therefore, be it
 
RESOLVED, That the above  referenced  Legislative  Bills  be  and  are
incorporated  as  part  of this resolution and are hereby adopted as the
New York State Senate's budget proposal for the 2023-2024 New York State
Budget.
 
REPORT ON THE AMENDED EXECUTIVE BUDGET
 
ALL STATE AGENCIES AND OPERATIONS
 
Adirondack Park Agency
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $6.3
  million.
 
Aging, Office for the
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $12.8 million.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $291
  million as follows:
  o Adds  $15  million to support Community Services for the Elderly
  Program.
  o Adds $13 million to  support  an  8.5  percent  Cost  of  Living
  Adjustment.
  o Adds $5 million to support Guardianship providers services.
  o Adds  $3  million  to  support  Naturally  Occurring  Retirement
  Community (NORC) and Neighborhood NORC Programs.
  o Adds $2 million to support the Long Term Care Ombudsman Program.
  o Adds $1.9  million  to  support  Legislative  Grants,  including
  $900,000  to  support  a  restoration  of prior year Legislative
  Grants.
  o Adds $1.6 million to support the Holocaust Survivors Initiative,
  including $700,000 to support a restoration of prior year Senate
  Legislative Grants.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4007-B)
  * PART G -- The Senate accepts the Executive  proposal  to  lower  the
  income  threshold  for  private  pay  protocols for Area Agencies on
  Aging from 400 percent of the Federal Poverty Level to  250  percent
  to allow more seniors the option of accessing and receiving services
  via private payment.
  * PART  Z  --  The  Senate  modifies  the Executive proposal requiring
  assisted living residences to report to the Department of Health  on
  quality  measures which the Department will use to grant an advanced
  standing  classification  by  omitting  the  provisions  related  to
  modified  inspection schedules for facilities with advanced standing
 
  classification  or  that  obtain  accreditation  from  a  nationally
  recognized accreditor.
 
Agriculture and Markets, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation of $182.5
  million.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $67.9 million as
  follows:
  o Restores:
  -$4  million  for  socially  and  economically  disadvantaged
  farmers.
  -$1 million for beginning farmer.
  -$481,000 for the Cornell Vet Diagnostic Lab.
  -$300,000 for Cornell hops breeding research.
  -$250,000 for the pro-dairy climate specialist.
  -$199,000 for Cornell farm labor specialist.
  -$100,000 for the John May farm safety fund.
  -$100,000 for Black Farmers United.
  -$75,000 for Cornell maple research.
  -$75,000 for Cornell vegetable research.
  -$75,000 for the Maple Producers Association.
  -$50,000 for Cornell concord grape research.
  -$50,000 for Cornell Geneva barley experimentation.
  -$50,000 for Empire Sheep producers.
  -$50,000 for the Hop Growers of New York.
  -$20,000 for Cornell onion research.
  -$20,000 for Teens for Food Justice.
  o Provides Additional:
  -$1.5 million for the Farm Viability Institute.
  -$1  million  for  Cornell  to study the ecological impacts of
  agrivoltaics.
  -$850,000 for the Farmland for a New Generation program.
  -$517,000 for the Apple Growers Association.
  -$500,000 for the Cornell livestock systems team.
  -$500,000 for Grow NYC.
  -$200,000 for the Northeast Organic Farmers Association.
  -$200,000 for the Turfgrass Environmental Stewardship Fund.
  -$125,000 for the Wine and Grape Foundation.
  -$100,000 for the Cannabis Growers Association.
  -$74,000 for the Cider Association.
  -$24,000 for the Brewers Association.
  -$24,000 for the Distillers Guild.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $46.6 million as
  follows:
  o Restores:
  -$5 million for Cornell Climate Adaptive Farms.
  -$5 million for local fairs.
  -$3 million for the companion animal fund.
  o Adds:
  -$1 million for a Hudson Valley research lab.
  -$465,000 for Grow NYC for a Regional Food Hub in Hunts Point.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
  * PART  OO  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to authorize
  local governments, school districts, and BOCES  to  purchase  up  to
  $250,000 of food grown, produced, or harvested in New York without a
  formal  competitive  process  by  adding language to direct New York
  State agencies and related entities to increase  the  percentage  of
  food  they  source  from  New  York producers to 30 percent (amended
  version of S.3125).
 
Alcoholic Beverage Control, Division of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All Funds recommendation of $5
  million, a decrease of $45 million or 90 percent  from  SFY  2022-23
  levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $78.2 million, an increase of $15.8 million or 25.2 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
  * PART K -- The Senate  intentionally  omits  the  Executive  proposal
  requiring  the  State Liquor Authority to draft and post a technical
  rewrite of  the  Alcoholic  Beverage  Control  Law  and  anticipates
  reviewing SLA's language when it is presented to the Legislature.
  * PART L -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to create a new
  wholesale  temporary  permit  by  lengthening  the  duration of such
  permits.
  * PART M -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  grant  automatic  approvals  for  applications for corporate changes
  that do not violate the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
  * PART N -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  allow  license  applicants  to  notify  municipalities  of  their
  application on the same day they apply.
  * PART O -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  permanently
  extend  and  amend  the  temporary retail permit program by omitting
  language that would have expanded the eligible locations in New York
  City and limiting  the  increase  in  the  length  of  extension  to
  applications for locations outside New York City.
 
Addiction Services and Supports, Office of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  All  Funds recommendation of $174.6
  million.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $968.6
  million as follows:
  o Adds $40 million to support  the  Opioid  Settlement  Fund  with
  appropriation  language  to  support programs recommended by the
  Opioid  Advisory  Board.  The  Senate  is  open  to  further
  discussions on further supporting harm reduction strategies.
  o Adds  $34  million  to  support  an  8.5  percent Cost of Living
  Adjustment.
  o Adds $5 million to support Legislative Grants.
 
  -$3 million to support restoration of prior  year  Legislative
  Grants.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $92 million.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4007-B)
  * NEW PART MM --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  allow  for  the
  expansion  of treatment services provided at the Office of Addiction
  Services and Supports treatment centers  to  include  treatment  for
  mental  health  and  physical  health  care  needs of the individual
  (S.3525).
 
Audit and Control, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $554.7  million,  an  increase of $98.3 million or 21.5 percent from
  SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  to
  decrease  $32  million  or  100  percent of funding from SFY 2022-23
  levels.  This  is  due  to  the  Special  Accidental  Death  Benefit
  appropriation transitioning to a miscellaneous appropriation.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $2.8 million, a decrease of $27.3 million or 90.6 percent  from  SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Budget, Division of the
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $50.2
  million, a decrease of $537,000 or  1.1  percent  from  SFY  2022-23
  levels,  by restoring $537,000 in membership dues for the Council of
  State Government, National Conference of Insurance Legislators,  and
  National Conference of State Legislatures.
 
Children and Family Services, Office of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation of $556.1
  million, an increase of $3.3 million or 0.6 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $7.9 billion, an
  increase of $1.5 billion or 41.8 percent from SFY 2022-23 levels, as
  follows:
  o Eliminates:
  -$4.8 million for the Employer-Supported Childcare Pilot.
  o Restores:
  -$2.4 million for 2-1-1.
  -$1.9 million in  additional  support  for  the  Kinship  Care
  Program, for a total of $2.2 million.
 
  -$1.5  million in additional support for the Youth Development
  Program, for a total of $15.6 million.
  -$4.5  million  for  Child  Care  Facilitated  Enrollment
  Demonstration Projects in New  York  City  ($500,000),  Erie
  County  ($500,000),  and  Onondaga County ($500,000), Nassau
  County ($1.5 million), and Suffolk County ($1.5 million).
  -$600,000 for the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act, for a  total
  of $7.08 million.
  o Adds:
  -$35  million  in  additional  support  to  increase  the
  reimbursement rate  for  Child  Welfare  Financing  from  62
  percent to 65 percent, for a total of $35 million.
  -$20.4  million  to  provide  an  additional 6 percent Cost of
  Living Adjustment (COLA) to all human service workers for  a
  total of 8.5 percent.
  -$10  million  to  establish  a  statewide  Youth Sports Grant
  Program.
  -$9.4  million  in  additional  support  for  the  Advantage
  Afterschool  programs  to  be  administered in the Office of
  Children and Family Services.
  -$5 million in additional support for Child Advocacy  Centers,
  for a total of $10.2 million.
  -$20 million to support legislative initiatives.
  o Child Care
  -$623  million  to  expand  child  care  eligibility up to 103
  percent of the State median income level in 2023. The Senate
  also proposes to increase  child  care  eligibility  to  129
  percent of the State median income level in 2024.
  -$500  million  for  the  Workforce  Retention  Grant program,
  providing up to $12,000 in salary enhancements to child care
  workers. Eligible child care workers must be employed  at  a
  childcare facility that serves families receiving subsidized
  child  care.  Employees will receive a proportional share of
  the $12,000 based  upon  the  percentage  of  an  employer's
  enrolled children that are receiving subsidized child care.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $60.11 million,
  a decrease of $33.5 million or 35.8 percent from SFY 2022-23  levels
  by  adding  $50 million to support the construction, conversion, and
  rehabilitation of properties to create and expand  access  to  child
  care.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4006-B)
  * PART  U  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to extend and
  improve New York State's child care  assistance  program  to  expand
  income eligibility to 103 percent of the State median income in 2023
  and to 129 percent of the State median income in 2024.
  * PART  V  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to extend the
  current  reimbursement  structure  for  residential  placements  of
  children  with special needs outside of New York for a period of one
  year.
  * PART W -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal  to  permanently
  authorize the Close to Home program.
  * NEW  PART EE -- The Senate advances language to provide an allowance
  for diapers (S.1210).
  * NEW PART LL -- The Senate advances language  to  establish  a  youth
  sports initiative grant fund (S.2749-A).
 
  * NEW  PART  MM  --  The  Senate  advances  the principles of creating
  presumptive eligibility for child care  assistance  with  provisions
  permitting  recovery of assistance provided to ineligible applicants
  (S.4667).
  * The Senate supports providing child care assistance for children who
  are  not  currently eligible for State coverage and will explore new
  coverage  options,  including  expanded  use  of  the  Facilitated
  Enrollment Program.
 
City University of New York (CUNY)
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $3.1 billion by
  providing an additional:
  o $333 million for a CUNY Matching Endowment.
  o $149 million for general operating aid.
  o $13 million for the elimination of graduate student fees.
  o $4.9 million for CUNY SEEK.
  o $2.25 million for the CUNY School of Labor and Urban Studies.
  o $1 million for Mental Health Services.
  o $350,000 for CUNY Black Male Initiative.
  o $180,000 for CUNY LEADS.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $1.9 billion  as
  follows:
  o Provides an additional:
  -$8.7 million in operating aid for the community colleges.
  -$238,000  for  the  Arthur  Eve  Higher Education Opportunity
  Program.
  o Restores $3.6 million for child care centers.
  o Omits language requiring CUNY to submit a plan to  the  Division
  of  Budget  to  operate in the future without a base aid funding
  floor.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $643 million  as
  follows:
  o Restores:
  -$435  million  in  Flexible  Capital,  and  directs  CUNY  to
  prioritize increased funding for  projects  to  address  the
  greatest deferred maintenance needs.
  -$3  million  for  Maintenance  of  the CUNY School of Labor &
  Urban Studies.
  o Provides an additional $1 million  for  the  Center  for  Puerto
  Rican Studies (CENTRO) at Hunter College.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4006-B)
  * PART  B  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  increase tuition at SUNY and CUNY.
  * PART C -- The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  ensure
  medication abortion access at SUNY and CUNY.
  * NEW PART CC -- The Senate advances language to eliminate current and
  future mandatory university fees to SUNY and CUNY graduate students,
  where  the  graduate  student  is  serving  either as a full-time or
  half-time graduate student worker (S.3500).
 
Civil Service, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $66.9 million, an increase of $15.8 million or 23.6 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  *  The Senate concurs with the Executive recommendation of $2 million,
  unchanged from SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
  * PART J -- The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  expand
  eligibility  for World Trade Center death and disability benefits to
  New York's organized militia.
  * PART S -- The Senate accepts the Executive  proposal  to  allow  the
  Department  of Civil Service or municipal commissions to establish a
  continuing eligible list for any class of positions  filled  through
  open competitive examination.
  * PART  T -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to increase the
  number of positions designated under the 55-B and 55-C  programs  to
  1,700 positions and to allow employees of those programs to transfer
  from non-competitive-class to competitive-class positions.
  * PART  V  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to extend the
  waiver on the income cap for retirees who return to work in a school
  setting by one year, until June 30, 2024.
  * PART W -- The Senate accepts the Executive  proposal  to  amend  the
  Contribution  Stabilization  Program for the State Retirement System
  to  provide  a  pathway  for  amortizing  employers  to  terminate
  participation  in  the  Contribution  Stabilization  Program if such
  employer has paid in  full  all  prior  year  amortization  amounts,
  including interest as determined by the State Comptroller.
  * PART  X  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  require that any  corporation,  district,  agency,  or  organization
  electing  to participate in the NYSHIP plan to pay interest for late
  payments.
  * PART Y -- The Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  include
  counties  in  the  list  of entities that pay the special accidental
  death  benefit  to  families  of  deceased  police  officers  and
  firefighters who died in the performance of their duties.
  * NEW  PART WW -- The Senate advances language to authorize police and
  fire members of the New York City Fire Department  pension  fund  to
  obtain  credit  for  certain  prior  service as an Emergency Medical
  Technician member (S.4794).
  * NEW PART BBB -- The Senate advances language to increase the cap  on
  retiree income from $35,000 to $50,000.
  * NEW  PART CCC -- The Senate advances language to provide that police
  officers in the NYC Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) who
  have or will transfer from the New York City  Employees'  Retirement
  System  (NYCERS)  to  the  New  York  State Police & Fire Retirement
  System (PFRS), will be able to transfer  service  credit  earned  in
  NYCERS towards their membership in PFRS (S.5557-A of 2022).
  * NEW  PART  EEE  --  The  Senate advances language to provide certain
  death benefits to correction officers, correction officer-sergeants,
  correction officer-captains, assistant wardens, associate wardens or
  wardens employed by Westchester County (S.1992).
  * NEW PART FFF -- The Senate  advances  language  to  provide  certain
  death benefits to fire marshals employed by Nassau County (S.3600).
 
Commission of Correction, State
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $3.9 million.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
  * PART C -- The Senate modifies the  Executive  proposal  to  purchase
  body  scanning  technology  for  State  Correctional  Facilities and
  Office of Children and Family Services (OCFS) facilities by removing
  the authorization for body scanning technology to be  used  in  OCFS
  facilities.  The Senate also supports the inclusion of language that
  would allow Correctional Facility staff to be subject to a search by
  this body scanning technology.
 
Corrections and Community Supervision, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of  $3
  billion  by  modifying  appropriation  language  to  require  the
  Department to report on the status of implementation of  the  Humane
  Alternatives to Long-Term (HALT) Solitary Confinement Act.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $37 million.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $481.2 million.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
  * PART  D  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  lower the hiring age of corrections officers from  21-years  old  to
  19-years old.
  * NEW  PART  TT  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  conform  the
  definition of an  incarcerated  individual  with  a  serious  mental
  illness  to the definition of "person with a serious mental illness"
  in the Mental Hygiene Law (S.4621).
 
Council on the Arts
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $5.3
  million.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $42.8 million as
  follows:
  o Restores:
  -$40 million for competitive grants.
  -$10  million  for  Regional Arts Councils Outside of New York
  City.
  * $1 million for ArtsWestchester.
  * $1 million for Arts Services Initiative of  Western  New
  York.
  * $1 million for Arts Mid-Hudson.
  * $1 million for Huntington Arts Council.
  * $1 million for Arts Center of the Capital Region.
  * $1 million for Genesee Valley Council on the Arts.
 
  * $1 million for CNY Arts.
  * $3 million via a RFP.
  -$1 million in Stabilization grants.
  -$750,000 for Senate initiatives.
  o Adds $5 million for Alive! Downtown Theatres.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive recommendation of no new capital
  funding by restoring:
  o $40 million for Arts and Cultural Facilities Improvements.
  o $10 million for Regional Arts Councils Outside of New York City.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4006-B)
  * NEW PART FF -- The Senate advances language to direct the  New  York
  State  Council  on  the  Arts  to  develop criteria and processes to
  designate arts and cultural districts (S.253).
 
Criminal Justice Services, Division of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $90.4 million.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $466.1
  million as follows:
  o Restores  $2.6  million  for  the  Westchester  County  Policing
  Program.
  o Adds:
  -$47 million to support Criminal Defender services.
  -$40 million to support Discovery Reform Criminal Defenders.
  -$20 million to support Operation SNUG.
  -$20 million to support Pretrial Services.
  -$14 million to support  funding  related  to  enforcement  of
  Extreme Risk Protection Orders.
  -$10  million  to  support  Legislative  grants  for community
  safety and restorative justice grant programs that include:
  * Support gun violence prevention programs, gang and crime
  reduction strategies managed by local  governments,  and
  community-based not-for-profit service providers.
  * Support  survivors  of  sexual  assault  and  domestic
  violence.
  * Support criminal and civil legal services,  alternatives
  to  incarceration,  community  supervision  and re-entry
  initiatives.
  -$2.2 million to support Prisoner Legal Services of New York.
  -$2  million  to  support  S.4511-A  Ramos,  which  expands
  eligibility  for,  and  grants available under, the District
  Attorney  and  Indigent  Legal  Service  Attorney  Loan
  Forgiveness Program.
  -$1 million to support implementation of Clean Slate Act.
  o Modifies  appropriation  language  to  include  New York City in
  Discovery Implementation and Pretrial Funding.
  o Modifies the  Executive  recommendation  related  to  the  Legal
  Services  Assistance  Fund  (LSAF) appropriation. Alternatively,
  the Senate requests that the LSAF program be allocated as it has
  been in previous years.
 
  -Restores $1.4 million for Civil or Criminal  Legal  Services,
  including  legal services for survivors of Domestic Violence
  or Veterans; and Indigent Parolee Legislative grants.
  o Modifies  the  Executive  recommendations related to the Federal
  Edward  Byrne  Justice  Assistance  Grant  (JAG)  appropriation.
  Alternatively, the Senate requests that the Byrne JAG program be
  allocated as it has been in previous years.
  -Adds  $1  million for violence, crime and drug prevention and
  alternatives to incarceration Legislative grants.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $103
  million  by  modifying  appropriation  language  of  the  Securing
  Communities Against Hate Crimes Grant to make  funds  available  for
  LGBTQ bars.
  * $50  million  for New York City District Attorneys to cover the cost
  of discovery reform implementation.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
  * PART A -- The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  extend
  various  provisions of law related to public protection programs and
  services in order to prevent any  lapses,  but  asserts  that  these
  provisions  are  better  addressed outside of the budget process and
  plans to revisit these provisions at a later date.
  * PART B -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  amend New York State's bail laws.
  * PART  F  --  The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to amend the
  Concealed Carry Improvement Act to amend provisions related  to  the
  Adirondack  and  Catskill  Parks,  remove  changes  to penalties for
  unlawful purchase of body armor, ensure safe operations  of  riflery
  programs  at  summer  camps,  and  ensure  the continued practice of
  demonstrations using historical weapons.
  * NEW PART SS -- The Senate advances  language  to  allow  Westchester
  County  to  set  its  own fees for pistol permits and other licenses
  related to  the  manufacture,  sale,  and  possession  of  firearms,
  rifles, and shotguns (S.4879).
  * NEW  PART  UU -- The Senate advances language to allow for automatic
  sealing for certain criminal records (S.211).
  * NEW PART YY -- The Senate advances language  to  expand  eligibility
  for,  and grants available under, the District Attorney and Indigent
  Legal Services Attorney Loan Forgiveness Program (S.4511-A).
 
Deferred Compensation Board
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $953,000,  an  increase  of  $33,000 or 3.6 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels.
 
Dormitory Authority of the State of New York
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4008-B)
  * PART Z -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  increase  the  Dormitory Authority's bond cap under the Medical Care
  Facilities Finance Agency Act.
  * PART AA -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal  to  authorize
  recipients  of  loans  or  grants  awarded  under  the  Downtown
  Revitalization Initiative (DRI) program and  the  NY  Forward  Grant
 
  program  to  use  the  Dormitory  Authority's planning, procurement,
  financing, and design build services by removing  local  development
  corporations  and  industrial  development  agencies  from  the
  legislation.
  * PART  BB -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to extend the
  Dormitory Authority's MWBE mentoring program  to  include  reporting
  language.
  * PART  LL -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to extend the
  Dormitory  Authority's  authorization  to  undertake  design  and
  construction  projects  for  the  Department  of  Environmental
  Conservation  and  Office  of  Parks,  Recreation  and  Historic
  Preservation by reducing it from five years to two years.
 
Economic Development, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive recommendation of $35 million, a
  decrease of $4.4 million or 11.1 percent from SFY 2022-23 levels, as
  follows:
  o Adds:
  -$250,000 for expanding the MWBE program data  collection  and
  reporting requirements.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive recommendation of $67.2 million,
  an increase of $3.6 million or 5.6 percent from SFY  2022-23  levels
  as follows:
  o Adds:
  -$5.5  million  in  additional  support  for  the  Centers  of
  Excellence (COEs), providing $1.25 million to  each  center,
  for a total of $17.5 million.
  -$5.2  million  in  additional  support  for  the  Centers for
  Advanced Technology (CATs), providing $1.25 million to  each
  center, for a total of $18.8 million.
  -$3  million  in  additional  support  for the High Technology
  Matching Grants, for a total of $15 million.
  o Restores $1  million  in  additional  support  for  the  Tourism
  Promotion Matching Grant program, for a total of $3.5 million.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4008-B)
  * NEW  PART  III  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  require the
  Department of Economic Development in conjunction with Empire  State
  Development  Corporation  and  other  agencies to conduct a study of
  public and private  museums  and  their  funding  systems  statewide
  (S.1124).
 
Education Department, New York State
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive recommendation of $652.5 million
  as follows:
  o Modifies language attached to the $2.5 million appropriation for
  a special education tuition methodology study to remove barriers
  to its successful implementation.
  o Omits language allowing for the transfer of oversight within the
  Office of the Professions to the Department of Health.
  o Adds:
  -$16 million for new hires.
 
  -$1 million for Foundation Aid Study.
  -$965,000 for a New York City School Governance Study.
  -$500,000 for a Universal Pre-Kindergarten Aid Study.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $43.1 billion as
  follows:
  o Intentionally  omits  language that requires duplicative funding
  reporting.
  o Intentionally omits language that prorates mandated services aid
  and comprehensive tuition policy payments.
  o Intentionally omits:
  -$10 million for new  High  School-College-Workforce  Pipeline
  Program.
  -$750,000  for  expansion  of  the Expanded Mathematics Access
  Program.
  o Restores:
  -$21.4 million for teacher resource centers.
  -$12 million for Yonkers School District.
  -$4 million for tax certiorari assistance.
  -$1.9 million for nonpublic school aid.
  -$1.5 million for Adult Literacy Education.
  -$1.5  million  carve-out  for  consortium  for  workforce
  education.
  -$1.25 million for NYSUT Many Threads, One Fabric.
  -$1 million for nonpublic school vaccination record-keeping.
  -$903,000 for NY School for the Deaf.
  -$903,000 for Henry Viscardi School for the Deaf.
  -$750,000 for the Dental Grant Program.
  -$500,000 for Mill Neck Manor School for the Deaf.
  -$500,000 for Center for Autism at SUNY Albany.
  -$500,000 for Long Island Pre-K Initiative.
  -$475,000 for Executive Leadership Institute.
  -$475,000 for Magellan Foundation.
  -$465,000 for Early College High School program.
  -$450,000 for United Community Schools.
  -$375,000 for Schomburg Library.
  -$365,000 for Mind Builders Creative Arts Center.
  -$350,000 for Latino U College Access (LUCA).
  -$180,000 for Garrison Union Free School District.
  -$175,000 for Hempstead District Monitor.
  -$175,000 for Wyandanch District Monitor.
  -$175,000 for Rochester District Monitor.
  -$112,500 for Langston Hughes Library.
  o Provides an additional:
  -$280 million for universal school meals.
  -$150 million reflecting the February database update.
  -$125 million to increase the minimum reimbursement for UPK.
  -$105 million for community school funding formula.
  -$44  million  for  expanding  special services aid for CTE to
  ninth grade.
  -$36 million for the prior-year aid queue.
  -$35 million for BOCES CTE salary increase.
  -$20 million for School Transportation Safety Zones  in  large
  cities.
  -$11.7 million for Mount Vernon School District.
  -$10 million for 4201 teacher salaries.
  -$10 million for Say Yes Buffalo Scholarship Inc.
 
  -$9 million for Senate initiatives.
  -$7 million for library operating aid.
  -$5.8 million for 4201 school general assistance.
  -$5 million for Higher Education Opportunity Program (HEOP).
  -$5 million for arts instruction for non-public schools.
  -$3.5 million for Bundy Aid.
  -$3 million for Students with Disabilities.
  -$2.6 million for Liberty Partnership Program (LPP).
  -$2.2 million for Science Technology Entry Program (STEP).
  -$1.7 million for the College Science Technology Entry Program
  (CSTEP).
  -$856,000 for the Foster Youth Initiative Program.
  -$500,000 for Recovery High Schools.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $99.3 million as
  follows:
  o Adds:
  -$25 million for library capital.
  -$4.5  million  for  health and safety projects at special act
  schools.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4006-B)
  * PART A -- The Senate modifies  the  Executive  proposal  related  to
  school aid to:
  o Accept  the  Contracts for Excellence extender for the 2023-2024
  school year;
  o Intentionally  omit  the  high  impact  tutoring  set  aside  of
  Foundation Aid;
  o Intentionally  omit  the proposal to remove the regional charter
  school cap and the proposal  to  authorize  the  re-issuance  of
  surrendered, revoked, or terminated charters;
  o Modify  the  prospective  universal  prekindergarten  enrollment
  reporting proposal to require school districts that are eligible
  for  universal  prekindergarten  aid,  but  that  have  not  yet
  utilized  such  aid  to  provide  information on the barriers in
  utilizing funding  and  requiring  a  three-year  implementation
  plan;
  o Modify  universal  prekindergarten per pupil aid to increase aid
  for early adopters of universal prekindergarten programs;
  o Affirm  building  aid  eligibility  to  school  districts  for
  universal  prekindergarten classrooms and require SED to release
  universal prekindergarten building aid guidance  to  all  school
  districts;
  o Intentionally  omit  the  zero-emission  bus  progress reporting
  requirement;
  o Modify to restore  the  allocation  for  Consortium  for  Worker
  Education reimbursement for the 2023-24 school year;
  o Intentionally omit the school level funding plan extender;
  o Accept the proposal to extend the Rochester City School District
  monitor from 2023 to 2025;
  o Modify  the  proposal  to  study  the  tuition  rate  setting
  methodology to remove the cost neutral language, to  ensure  the
  fiscal  stability  of these programs, and to provide predictable
  annual funding levels; and
  o Intentionally  omit  the  proposal  to  limit  nonpublic  school
  services aid.
  * NEW PART A-1 -- The Senate advances language to:
 
  o Establish  the  Universal  School  Meals  Program to require all
  schools that  participate  in  the  National  School  Lunch  and
  Breakfast Program to serve breakfast and lunch at no cost to the
  student (amended version of S.1678);
  o Expand  the  eligibility  of  the  Farm  to School Reimbursement
  program (amended version of S.423);
  o Expand capital outlay authority to school districts (S.2990);
  o Establish multi-year cost allowances  for  the  Binghamton  City
  School District (S.2672);
  o Allow  Special  Act  School  Districts,  853  schools,  and 4410
  schools to retain the 11% cost of  living  increase  before  the
  reconciliation process occurs (S.9132 of 2022);
  o Require  interim  rates  to include the annual growth amount for
  such rates approved in the  current  school  year  and  annually
  thereafter  for  Special  Act School Districts, 853 schools, and
  4410 schools (amended version of S.9134 of 2022);
  o Increase tuition rates for all Special Act School Districts, 853
  schools, and  4410  schools  commensurate  with  the  state  aid
  increases (amended version of S.6516-A of 2022);
  o Authorize 4201 schools to establish a fiscal reserve fund;
  o Increase the aidable salaries for BOCES staff;
  o Extend  reimbursement  for ninth graders in Special Services Aid
  for non-component school districts;
  o Expand community school grants and the distribution of  funding;
  and
  o Establish  an Arts and Music Grant Program for nonpublic schools
  to hire arts and music teachers.
  * PART D -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal  to  remove  the
  maximum award cap for the Liberty Partnerships Program.
  * PART  E -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to allow public
  accounting firms to have minority ownership by non-certified  public
  accountants.
  * NEW PART HH -- The Senate advances language to automatically approve
  the  registration of new programs at colleges after 45 days, without
  SED approval, at SUNY, CUNY and independent colleges  under  certain
  conditions (S.3412).
  * NEW  PART  NN  -- The Senate advances language to allow some nursing
  clinical education to be  completed  through  simulation  under  SED
  approval (S.447-C).
 
Elections, State Board of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $38.8 million, an increase of $18.4 million or 90.1 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $29  million,  an  increase of $15 million or 107.1 percent from SFY
  2022-23  levels  with  modifications  to  provide  funding  for  the
  following:
  o $15  million  for local boards of elections to increase salaries
  and hire new employees.
  o $2 million for the Elections Database and Institute.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
 
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation which  provides  no
  capital  appropriations  for the State Board of Elections, by adding
  $15 million for local boards of elections for new  voting  equipment
  and software/technology upgrades.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
  * NEW  PART  DD  --  The Senate advances language to establish the New
  York Voting and Elections Database and Institute (S.657).
  * NEW  PART  EE  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  prohibit
  contributions  by  foreign-influenced  business entities and require
  certification  that  contributing  business  entities  are  not  a
  foreign-influenced business entity (S.371).
  * NEW  PART  FF  -- The Senate advances language to exempt poll worker
  pay from state taxes and public benefit cutoff thresholds (S.613).
  * NEW PART GG -- The Senate advances language to increase the  minimum
  pay for poll workers (S.136).
  * NEW  PART  HH -- The Senate advances language to establish mandatory
  staffing levels at local boards of elections (S.644).
  * NEW PART II  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  require  local
  election commissioners to be full-time employees (S.611).
  * NEW PART JJ -- The Senate advances language to establish a mandatory
  training curriculum for poll workers (S.587).
  * NEW PART KK -- The Senate advances language to establish a mandatory
  training  curriculum  for local board of elections commissioners and
  employees (S.617).
 
Empire State Development Corporation
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $271.1  million,
  a  decrease  of $469 million or 63.4 percent from SFY 2022-23 levels
  as follows:
  * Adds:
  o $100 million to establish a Small  Business  Development  Grants
  Program.
  o $7.5  million  to  establish  the New York State Entrepreneurial
  Traning Grants program.
  o $1 million for a study on New York State's  public  and  private
  museum funding systems.
  o $2.4  million  in  additional  support  for  the  Minority  and
  Women-Owned Business Development  and  Lending  Program,  for  a
  total of $3 million.
  o $5.5 million to support legislative initiatives.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive recommendation of $1 billion, a
  decrease of $3.5 billion or 77.2 percent from SFY 2022-23 levels  as
  follows:
  o Adds:
  -$5 million for the American LGBTQ+ Museum.
  -$2 million for the Center for Dance Training.
  o Restores  $150  million  for  another  round of RESTORE New York
  program.
  * The Senate is supportive of affordable housing at the 5 World  Trade
  Center site.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
 
  * PART  CC -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  rename  and  update  the  SUNY  Tax-free  Areas  to  Revitalize  and
  Transform  UPstate  New  York  program (START-UP NY) to the Extended
  Prosperity and Innovation Campus (EPIC) Initiative.
  * PART  DD  --  The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to create a
  matching grant program for the Small  Business  Innovation  Research
  and  Small  Business Technology Transfer grant programs where one to
  one matching grants would be awarded to  businesses  who  receive  a
  grant  under  the respective federal program by including additional
  program guidelines regarding the number and value of grants  awarded
  and by including a 5-year claw back provision (S.1824).
  * PART  FF -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  increase the maximum loan amount under the  Linked  Deposit  Program
  from $2 million to $6 million.
  * PART  GG -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to extend the
  general loan powers of the Urban Development  Corporation  (UDC)  to
  make  loans in connection with a broad range of economic development
  programs by reducing it from five years to one year.
  * PART HH -- The Senate  modifies  the  Executive  proposal  to  allow
  Minority  and Women-owned Business Enterprise (MWBE) State and local
  certification  reciprocity  by  an  administrative  process  and  to
  increase  the  State  and  New  York  City MWBE discretionary buying
  thresholds. Under the Executive proposal, certification  reciprocity
  is  facilitated administratively by MOU agreements between the State
  and local MWBE programs. The Senate modifies the Executive  proposal
  by  increasing  the  State's  MWBE discretionary buying threshold to
  $750,000  and  increases  the  New  York  City  MWBE  discretionary
  threshold  to  $1.5  million.  The  Senate  also  advances  language
  modifying this proposal by adding a capital access program to assist
  MWBEs in highly-distressed areas (S.1690).
  * PART JJ -- The Senate modifies  the  Executive  proposal  to  extend
  UDC's  authorization  to  administer  the  Empire  State  Economic
  Development Fund by reducing the extension from five  years  to  one
  year.
  * NEW  PART NNN -- The Senate advances language to create the "NY Hemp
  Project" within the Excelsior Jobs Program to attract and  establish
  a hemp manufacturing industry to the State.
  * NEW  PART  QQQ  --  The  Senate  advances  language to direct UDC to
  provide  funding  for  municipalities  to  award  grants  to  create
  entrepreneurial training programs (S.2005).
  * NEW  PART  WWW  --  The  Senate  advances  legislation expanding and
  enhancing the annual and periodic Minority and Women-owned  Business
  Enterprise  (MWBE)  reporting requirements; expanding the powers and
  duties  of  the  Director  of  the  MWBE  Division;  developing  a
  clearinghouse  of  information  on programs and services provided by
  contracting  entities;  expanding  MWBE  program  benefits  to
  state-assisted  project  contracts;  and introducing a new violation
  and enforcement component to the MWBE program (S.2006).
 
Employee Relations, Office of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $12  million,  an  increase  of  $263,000  or  2.3  percent from SFY
  2022-23.
 
Energy Research and Development Authority
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive recommendation of $225.8 million
  by shifting the funding for the EmPower Plus program  to  be  funded
  within NYSERDA revenues.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
  * PART  WW  --  The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to prohibit
  installation of fossil fuel equipment and building  systems  in  new
  construction  and  phasing  out  the sale and installation of fossil
  fuel space and water heating  equipment  in  existing  buildings  by
  substituting  its  own language that a municipality may only issue a
  permit  for  new  construction  under  seven  stories  that  is  an
  all-electric  building  by 2025, and may only issue a permit for new
  construction seven stories or more that is an all-electric  building
  by  2028.  The  Senate  language  also  directs  the  New York Power
  Authority to establish a program to fully  decarbonize  and  achieve
  zero  on-site  emissions  for State-owned campuses and facilities by
  2040, with immediate funding for  decarbonization  projects  at  the
  highest-emitting  campuses  and  facilities,  subject  to  labor
  protections and standards.
  * PART ZZ -- The Senate accepts the  Executive  proposal  to  continue
  authorizing  NYSERDA  to  use  an  assessment  on  gas  and electric
  corporations to finance a portion of its research,  development  and
  demonstration,  policy and planning, and Fuel NY program, as well as
  climate change-related expenses of the Department  of  Environmental
  Conservation and the Department of Agriculture and Markets's Fuel NY
  program.
  * PART AAA -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to direct the
  Department  of Environmental Conservation and NYSERDA to establish a
  cap-and-invest program to implement emissions reduction requirements
  under the Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act by  adding
  specific  programmatic  details regarding issuance and allocation of
  allowances, labor standards and protections,  prevention  of  market
  manipulation, and protections for disadvantaged communities, as well
  as by setting up the Climate and Community Protection Fund to ensure
  all benefits and rebates from the program are equitably distributed.
 
Environmental Conservation, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive recommendation of $560.2 million
  and adds $1 million for water resources for the protection of  class
  C streams.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive recommendation of $1.9 million,
  and provides additional funding as follows:
  o $100,000 for the Adirondack Diversity Initiative, for a total of
  $400,000.
  o $55,000 for Interstate Environmental Commissions, for a total of
  $97,000.
  o The Senate supports the Department providing funding for the  US
  Army Corps of Engineers Mamaroneck Sheldrake Project.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $1.9 billion, as
  follows:
 
  o Increases the Environmental Protection Fund to $500 million, and
  rejects the Executive's proposal to fund staffing costs from the
  Fund. Line increases include:
  -Public  access  and  stewardship  projects  increased  to $70
  million.
  -Land acquisition increased to $47.6 million.
  -Climate resilient farms increased to $30 million.
  -Parks projects, including municipal parks, increased  to  $30
  million.
  -Farmland protection increased to $25 million.
  -Zoos, Botanical Gardens, and Aquaria (ZBGA) funding increased
  to $25 million.
  -Ocean and Great Lakes projects increased to $25 million.
  -Water quality improvement projects increased to $25 million.
  -Invasive species projects increased to $22 million.
  -Municipal recycling projects increased to $20 million.
  -Soil  and  water  conservation  districts  increased to $18.5
  million.
  -Climate smart communities increased to $18 million.
  -Waterfront revitalization projects increased to $18 million.
  -Environmental justice projects increased to $15 million.
  -Climate resiliency plans increased to $10 million.
  -Long Island South Shore Estuary increased to $5 million.
  -Finger Lake - Lake Ontario Watershed increased to $3 million.
  -The Senate also carves out priority projects, including:
  * $15.3 million for a new grant program to promote  forest
  and  woodland  conservation,  climate smart practices on
  farmland, and farmland preservation.
  * $10  million  for  Adirondack  and  Catskill  park
  stewardship.
  * $5.5  million  for  Adirondack  lake  monitoring  survey
  (SCALE).
  * $5  million  for  Land  Trust  Alliance  Conservation
  Easements.
  * $3  million  for  the  Onondaga County Resource Recovery
  Agency to reduce solid waste.
  * $1 million for SUNY ESF's Forestry Institute.
  * $600,000 for the Camp Santononi Historic Area.
  * $500,000 for the revitalization of the Great South Bay.
  * $500,000 for Niagara River Greenway Commission.
  * $250,000 for the Town of Amherst splash pad.
  * $225,000 for WNY Land Conservancy Riverline.
  * $200,000 for Historic Huguenot Society's restoration  of
  the Bevier-Elting House.
  * $100,000 for the High Peaks Information Center.
  * $100,000  for  the  Catskill Center for Conservation and
  Development.
  * $100,000 for Catskill Mountainkeeper.
  * $25,000 for the restoration of Lake Ossi.
  o The  Senate  also  adds  $100  million  for  the  Clean  Water
  Infrastructure Act, and carves out:
  -$100  million  for  the  Safe  Water  Infrastructure  Action
  Program.
  -$50 million for septic replacement.
  -$50 million for lead service line replacement.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
 
  * PART PP -- The Senate modifies the Executive  proposal  to  enact  a
  producer  responsibility program for packaging and paper products by
  expanding the  proposal  to  include  single-use  plastic  products,
  adding  an  office of recycling inspector general, prohibiting toxic
  contaminants  in  such  products,  adding  environmental  justice
  protections,  and  increasing  source  reduction  requirements  and
  enforcement (S.4246).
  * PART  QQ  --  The  Senate  modifies  the Executive proposal to allow
  municipalities to receive aid under  the  Environmental  Restoration
  Program  for  investigating  and remediating sites contaminated with
  emerging contaminants by ensuring that the  definition  of  emerging
  contaminants is not inadvertently exclusionary and to retain limited
  indemnification for municipalities.
  * PART  RR -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  make the pilot deer hunting program for mentored youth permanent.
  * PART SS -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to  remove  the
  sunset provision for pesticide registration fees.
  * PART  TT  --  The  Senate  modifies  the Executive proposal to grant
  Suffolk County authorization to establish a  county-wide  wastewater
  management  district  by  authorizing  Suffolk  County to fund water
  quality projects through sales and use-related revenues if  approved
  by voters pursuant to a county referendum.
  * PART  UU  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to amend the
  Local Finance Law to expand funding eligibility for  replacement  of
  lead  service  lines,  including  portions  of lead service lines on
  private property.
  * NEW PART EEE -- The  Senate  advances  language  to  require  annual
  reporting on State climate expenditures (S.288).
  * NEW PART FFF -- The Senate advances language to fund replacement and
  rehabilitation  of  local  drinking water, storm water, and sanitary
  sewer systems which are not under the maintenance and/or operational
  jurisdiction of a private entity or New York City, and to distribute
  such funding based on a variety  of  factors  including  length  and
  width of pipes, infrastructure age, the nature of other water system
  assets,  and  socioeconomic factors in order to achieve an equitable
  distribution of aid (S.4350).
  * NEW  PART  HHH  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  expand  the
  Returnable  Container  Act  by  increasing the deposit on returnable
  beverage containers to ten cents, requiring deposits  on  additional
  types of beverage containers, including containers for wine, liquor,
  cider,  non-carbonated  soft  drinks, certain juices, coffee and tea
  beverages, and carbonated fruit beverages, increasing  the  handling
  fee  for  returnable containers to six cents, creating post-consumer
  content  requirements  for  returnable  containers,  increasing
  flexibility  for retailers required to accept returnable containers,
  and providing additional protections  for  consumers  and  retailers
  (S.237).
  * NEW  PART JJJ -- The Senate advances language to establish a climate
  change cost recovery program to require fossil fuel  companies  that
  have  contributed  significantly to the buildup of greenhouse gasses
  in the atmosphere to compensate the State based on  such  companies'
  greenhouse  gas  contributions,  and directs the proceeds to be used
  for climate change-related  expenditures  in  a  manner  similar  to
  S.2129,  but  with  proceeds  directed  to the Climate and Community
  Protection Fund.
  * NEW PART KKK -- The Senate advances language to  provide  additional
  protections for class C streams, in a manner similar to S.1725.
 
Executive Chamber
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of $23.3
  million for the Executive Chamber, an increase of $5.45 million,  or
  30.5 percent, from SFY 2022-23.
 
Financial Control Board
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $3.5
  million, unchanged from SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Financial Services, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $447.2  million,  an  increase of $50.2 million or 12.6 percent from
  SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of  $74.2
  million,  a decrease of $10 million or 11.9 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels, to provide funding for the following restorations:
  o $11 million for the Commuter Van Stabilization Program.
  o $250,000 for the Education Debt Consumer Assistance Program.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4008-B)
  * PART S -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  authorize  the  Department  of  Financial  Services  to  promulgate
  regulations relating  to  the  payment  of  debit  and  credit  card
  transactions.
  * PART  U  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to extend the
  Entertainment  Subsidy  Assistance  Demonstration  Program  for  an
  additional year.
  * PART  W  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  allow automobile insurance companies  to  opt  out  of  the  vehicle
  inspection requirement.
  * NEW  PART  GGG  --  The  Senate  advances  language  establishing  a
  commission to conduct a feasibility study on formation  and  control
  of a State public bank (S.1755).
 
Gaming Commission
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation of $108.8
  million, an increase of $1.0 million or 0.9 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $237.0
  million,  a  decrease  of  $153.0  million  or 39.2 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4009-B)
  * PART X -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to authorize  a
  Belmont  Racetrack  redevelopment loan by adding provisions ensuring
  that  the  commitments  for  renovations  are  upheld,  clarifying
 
  Franchise  Oversight  Board  and Division of Budget oversight of the
  agreement, providing  for  labor  protections  (including  MWBE  and
  service-disabled  veteran  protections),  and  placing requirements,
  including  an  affordable  housing  component,  on  the  transfer of
  Aqueduct Racetrack land once the franchise  corporation's  lease  on
  the property reverts back to the State.
  * PART  Y  --  The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to eliminate
  Quick Draw restrictions by accepting the  portion  of  the  proposal
  that  would  eliminate  the  minimum 2,500 square foot threshold for
  facilities offering Quick Draw but omitting the  Executive  proposal
  to  permit  those  under  21  years  of  age  to  play Quick Draw in
  establishments offering alcohol.
  * PART Z -- The Senate intentionally omits the proposal to provide for
  closure of the Catskill  Off-Track  Betting  Corporation  (OTB)  and
  supports permitting Catskill OTB to access capital acquisition funds
  to  support  payment of salaries and benefits of employees and other
  expenses of the OTB at  an  appropriate  level  pending  receipt  of
  additional fiscal information from the OTB.
  * PART  AA  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to authorize
  use of  capital  funds  by  Capital  Off-Track  Betting  Corporation
  (Capital OTB) for one year and provides similar authorization to the
  Catskill OTB.
  * PART  BB  --  The  Senate  accepts  the Executive proposal to extend
  pari-mutuel tax rates and simulcast provisions for one year.
  * NEW PART EE -- The Senate advances language  to  prohibit  off-track
  betting  (OTB)  corporation  employees from providing items of value
  exceeding $15 to certain associates of the corporation (S.5549).
  * NEW PART FF -- The Senate advances language  to  prohibit  off-track
  betting  (OTB)  corporation  vehicles  from  being used as take-home
  vehicles (S.5550).
  * NEW PART GG -- The Senate advances language to change the membership
  of the board of directors of the Western Regional Off-Track  Betting
  (OTB) Corporation (S.5552).
 
General Services, Office of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $1.08 billion, an increase of $30.6 million or 2.9 percent from  SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $259.2 million, a decrease of $184.6 million or  41.6  percent  from
  SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
  * PART  Q  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to extend the
  State Commission on the Restoration of the Capitol for an additional
  five years, to now expire April 1, 2028.
  * PART R -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to  allow  State
  agencies  to  require  electronic  bid  submissions  with  technical
  clarifications.
  * NEW  PART  OO  --  The  Senate  advances  language  providing  price
  escalation  relief  to State contractors and subcontractors affected
  by spikes in material costs during the early days of COVID-19. Under
  the proposal, public contractors would  be  empowered  to  apply  to
  their  contracting  State  entity  for  up  to 5 percent retroactive
 
  relief, if the contract in question accepted bids up to  April  2020
  and the material cost increases occurred after March 2020 (S.8844 of
  2022).
 
General State Charges
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $7.1 billion, a decrease of $291.8 million, or 4  percent  from  SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Green Thumb
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $5.3
  million.
 
Greenway Heritage Conservancy of the Hudson River Valley
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive recommendation of $250,000.
 
Health, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $4.5 billion.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the  Executives  All  Funds recommendation of
  $217.5 billion as follows:
 
Public Health
  o Restores:
  -$133 million in Tobacco Tax Revenue due  to  modification  of
  the Executive proposal HMH Part O.
  -$66.8 million to continue Managed Long Term Care Quality Pool
  Payments and Managed Long-Term Care Distressed Pool Plan.
  -$30 million for Health Home Program.
  -$18 million for Nourish NY.
  -$3.8 million to support School Based Health Centers.
  -$1 million to support Family Planning Services.
  -$1 million to support Nurse-Family Partnership.
  -$666,666  to  support  the  Albert  Einstein  College  of
  Medicine-Firefighter.
  pre-leukemia program.
  -$475,000  to  support  the  LGBT  Health  and  Human  Service
  Network.
  o Adds:
  -$1.7  billion  to support modifications relating to Essential
  Plan expansions.
  -$277.5  million  to  support  the  Assisted  Daily  Living
  eligibility repealer.
  -$75  million to the New York State Tobacco Control Program to
  support cessation  and  education  programs  in  communities
  targeted by the promotion of flavored tobacco products.
  -$50 million for Licensed Home Care Service Agencies grants.
 
  -$30  million  for  Legislative  Grants, including $12 million
  restoration to support prior year grants.
  -$25  million  for  Certified Home Health Agencies and Hospice
  Service providers.
  -$23 million to  support  an  11  percent  Reimbursement  Rate
  Increase for Early Intervention programs.
  -$22  million  for  Hunger prevention and Nutrition Assistance
  Program.
  -$10.4 million for the Occupational Health Clinic Network.
  -$10 million for the Medical Debt Pilot Program.
  -$8.7 million to support costs associated  with  intentionally
  omitting the Executive proposal in Part D of S.4007-B.
  -$8 million to support expansion of CHP program.
  -$7 million to support changes relating to the Cancer Services
  Program.
  -$1  million  to  establish  a task force on missing women and
  girls who are Black, indigenous, and people of color.
  -$1 million for a Director  of  Hospice  and  Palliative  Care
  Access and Quality.
  -$1.1 million to support Area Health Education Centers.
  -$1  million  to  support  the  Transgender  and  Gender
  Non-Conforming Wellness and Equity Fund program.
  -$1 million to support the Community Service  Society  of  New
  York for Community Health Advocates Consortium.
  -$1 million to support Native American Health Clinics.
 
Medicaid
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $103
  billion as follows:
  o Adds:
  -$1 billion in State funding for  Financially  Distressed  and
  Safety-Net Hospitals.
  -$624 million for State-share Medicaid local takeover growth.
  -$412.5  million  to  support  ten  percent Reimbursement Rate
  Increase related to the modifications HMH Part E.
  -$187 million to support safe staffing for Nursing Home.
  -$157.5 million to support a ten  percent  Reimbursement  Rate
  Increase related to the modification of HMH Part I.
  * The  Department of Health shall find solutions to ensure
  that staffing shortages do not result  in  underutilized
  nursing home beds.
  -$10  million  to  support  Doula  services  and  provide
  reimbursement rates for providers
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $2.5
  billion as follows:
  o Adds  $200 million to support the Statewide Health Care Facility
  Transformation Program.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4007-B)
  * PART A -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  extend  the
  Medicaid  Global  Cap  through  SFY  2025  by  instead  repealing it
  (S.4861).
  * PART B -- The Senate  modifies  the  Executive  proposal  to  extend
  various  provisions and programs within the Public Health and Mental
  Hygiene Laws by adding a provision making the  carve-out  of  school
  based health centers from Medicaid managed care permanent (S.2339).
 
  * PART  C  -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to reauthorize
  the Health Care Reform Act administration  and  initiatives  through
  2026.
  * PART  D  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  allow the Department of Health to eliminate drugs from the  Medicaid
  list  of  over-the-counter  covered  drugs  and eliminate prescriber
  prevails from Medicaid.
  * PART E -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to increase the
  operating component of hospital inpatient services Medicaid rate  by
  5  percent,  reduce  the  State's share of the Indigent Care Pool to
  target funds to  high-need  facilities,  authorize  rural  emergency
  hospitals,  make  permanent  the  Department's  ability  to  award
  temporary  payments  to  eligible  facilities  in  severe  financial
  distress,  and  expand  the  definition  of an eligible Vital Access
  Provider Assurance Program funding recipient by increasing  hospital
  inpatient  and  outpatient  rates by 10 percent. The Senate strongly
  supports increasing rates to community-based health centers.
  * PART F -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal  to  extend  the
  Physicians  Excess  Medical  Malpractice  Program for a year through
  June 30, 2024.
  * PART H -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to make changes
  to Essential Plan eligibility and delay the  expansion  of  coverage
  for  undocumented people over 64 by accepting the proposed expansion
  for the Essential Plan but  rejecting  the  delay  in  coverage  for
  undocumented  immigrants  over  64,  and  including  coverage  for
  undocumented immigrants regardless of age through the Essential Plan
  (Part of S.2237).
  * PART I -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  extend  the
  authority for Medicaid Long Term Care (MLTC) plans for an additional
  four  years, extend the moratorium on the processing and approval of
  applications of new partial capitation MLTC plans  until  March  31,
  2027,  create  MLTC  performance  metrics,  allow  the Department of
  Health to start an MLTC procurement, repeal the Fiscal  Intermediary
  procurement process, increase the operating component of residential
  healthcare facilities and assisted living program services rate by 5
  percent,  and  eliminate  wage  parity requirements for the Consumer
  Directed Personal Assistance Program and create a State fund to help
  pay health plan  premiums  for  personal  assistants  by  increasing
  residential  healthcare  facilities  and  assisted  living  program
  services rates by 10 percent,  accepting  certain  MLTC  performance
  metrics, accepting the extension of authority for MLTC plans and the
  moratorium of new MLTC plans, and omitting the rest of the proposal.
  * PART  J  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  create  a  pay-and-resolve  mechanism  for  emergency  services  and
  inpatient admissions resulting from emergency services.
  * PART  K  --  The  Senate  modifies  the Executive proposal to expand
  Medicaid eligibility to incarcerated people 30 days prior to release
  and to children and  adults  in  institutes  of  mental  disease  by
  expanding  coverage for incarcerated people to include full Medicaid
  coverage and including a taskforce to study long term solutions  for
  children who may gain and then lose coverage under this proposal.
  * PART  L  --  The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive proposal to create
  guiding principles for site-of-service utilization reviews.
  * PART M -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  reform  the
  approval  processes  for  health  care  projects and transactions by
  accepting increased construction fees for hospitals, nursing  homes,
  and  diagnostic  and treatment centers construction applications and
 
  exempting core public health services from home care licensure  when
  provided by a local health department.
  * PART  N  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to expand the
  Medicaid Buy-In Program for working people with disabilities.
  * PART O -- The Senate modifies the Executive  proposal  to  implement
  various  tobacco  control  policies to strengthen the flavored vapor
  products ban, support local enforcement, and  ensure  education  and
  outreach efforts focus on consumers historically targeted by tobacco
  and vapor product advertising.
  * PART  P -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to authorize a
  fifth round  of  grants  for  the  Statewide  Health  Care  Facility
  Transformation  Program  by  providing  $200  million  in additional
  funding, creating  a  $200  million  set-aside  for  community-based
  organizations,  specifically  identifying  cybersecurity  projects
  within the $500 million for technological and telehealth  set-aside,
  adding  language  to  allow  this  funding  to support conversion of
  buildings and  new  construction  in  underserved  communities,  and
  setting  aside  $50  million  for  community-based  organizations to
  engage in these activities.
  * PART Q -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to expand access
  to primary care by allowing more health-based social needs  services
  to be covered by Medicaid.
  * PART  R  --  The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive proposal to expand
  coverage of Medicaid services to  include  services  provided  by  a
  nutritionist  or  certified  dietitian  and  chronic  disease
  self-management training services for people living with arthritis.
  * PART S -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal  to  revitalize
  the  EMS system by intentionally omitting the repeal and replacement
  of the existing certificate of need  process  for  new  or  modified
  operating,  intentionally  omitting  the  establishment  of  new and
  changes to existing regulatory  bodies,  accepting  investments  and
  proposals  related to workforce training, recruitment and retention,
  accepting  the  new  definition  for  "emergency  medical  service,"
  accepting  proposals  for  system-sustainability  plans, authorizing
  mobile integrated healthcare,  and  advancing  language  to  provide
  payments  to  municipalities  whose  EMS  are  other  municipal
  departments, volunteer or  non-profit  entities  (Part  of  S.1852),
  advancing  provisions  to  label  EMS as an "essential" and required
  service and allowing for volunteer EMS to be eligible  for  benefits
  under  State Pension system and NYSHIP systems (Part of S.4020), and
  providing  for  a  uniform  ambulance  assessment  fee  on  certain
  ambulance revenue to cover increased Medicaid rates for EMS services
  (S.5122).
  * PART  T -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to establish a
  lead paint inspection registry for rental properties located outside
  New York City by changing the administrator of the program from  the
  Department  of  Health  to  the  Division  of  Housing and Community
  Renewal.
  * PART U -- The Senate modifies the  Executive  proposal  to  prohibit
  electronic  communication  service  entities  from  sharing abortion
  procedure  information  with  out-of-state  law  enforcement  and
  "geofencing"  around  healthcare facilities by advancing language to
  establish privacy standards for health  products  and  services  and
  permissible  data  brokering,  and  establishing  a private right of
  action for violations (S.158).
  * PART V -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  allow  pharmacists  to  prescribe  and  dispense  self-administered
 
  hormonal contraceptives and emergency contraception. The Senate  has
  passed S.1043 to provide this access.
  * PART  W  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  expand  the  scope  of  practice  for  medical  providers  and  the
  introduction of the Interstate Licensure Compact and Nurse Licensure
  Compact.
  * PART  X  --  The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive proposal to create
  minimum standards for temporary healthcare staffing agencies.
  * PART Y -- The Senate modifies  the  Executive  proposal  to  require
  affidavits  for  medical  debt  lawsuits,  require  registration and
  reporting of certain  companies  in  the  prescription  drug  supply
  chain,  require  drug  manufacturers  to  notify  the  Department of
  Financial Services of drug price increases,  report  pay  for  delay
  agreements,  create  a  uniform  financial assistance form to access
  Indigent Care Pool and Indigent Care Adjustment funding, and  create
  a  guaranty fund by advancing language that creates a presumption of
  anticompetitiveness against pay for delay agreements  (S.4513),  and
  accepting the rest of the proposal.
  * PART  AA  -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to mandate an
  additional  test  for  syphilis  in  pregnant  patients  and  expand
  circumstances  where  an individual must be screened, diagnosed, and
  treated for Hepatitis C (HepC or HCV).
  * PART BB -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal  to
  add  substances  to  the  State  Schedule I and II lists, expand the
  definition of "imitation controlled substance,"  and  establish  new
  criminal  penalties  related  to  the  possession  and  sale  of  an
  imitation controlled substance.
  * PART CC -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal  to
  transfer  oversight  of  healthcare  workers from the New York State
  Education Department to the Department of Health.
  * NEW PART KK --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  remove  certain
  restrictions  on  eligibility  for  personal  and home care services
  under Medicaid (S.328).
  * NEW PART LL -- The Senate advances  language  to  establish  a  task
  force  on  missing  women  and  girls who are Black, indigenous, and
  people of color (S.4266).
  * NEW PART OO -- The Senate advances language to clarify the look-back
  period for Medicaid eligibility for home care services (S.2125).
  * NEW PART PP -- The Senate advances language  to  establish  a  grant
  program  for medical interns or residents to receive training in the
  performance of an abortion and related reproductive health  services
  and establishes a fund for the grant program to draw from (S.3060).
  * NEW  PART  QQ -- The Senate advances language to establish a Women's
  Health Program in state and local correctional facilities (S.4264).
  * NEW PART RR -- The Senate advances language to increase the  minimum
  wage  for  home  care  workers by an additional two dollars over two
  years subject to federal participation, require  the  Department  of
  Health  (DOH)  to  make state-directed payments to providers for the
  purposes of supporting wage increases, and allow the Comptroller  to
  review  contracts  between  managed  care organizations and licensed
  home care services agencies, fiscal intermediaries, or any  agencies
  subject to the home care minimum wage increase, to ensure that rates
  being  offered  are  adequate  and  meet  the Department's actuarial
  standards. Should the Comptroller find evidence of inadequate rates,
  it will refer such instances to DOH and the Medicaid  Fraud  Control
  Unit  (OMIG) for enforcement.  DOH and OMIG will have the ability to
  not act on the referral. The reports and responses  will  be  public
 
  information and made available in the Comptroller's website (Part of
  S.3189).
  * NEW  PART SS -- The Senate advances language to cover doula services
  under the Medicaid program and establish a rate for those services.
  * NEW PART TT -- The Senate advances language to conduct  a  study  on
  the  Medicaid durable medical equipment, prosthetics, orthotics, and
  supply  program,  focused  on  rate  adequacy  and  patient  access
  (S.3131).
  * NEW  PART UU -- The Senate advances language to retroactively enroll
  children in the Child Health Plus program to the first of the  month
  when their application is submitted (S.4885).
  * NEW PART VV -- The Senate advances language to repeal the 340B carve
  out,  require  managed  care  providers  (MCPs) and pharmacy benefit
  managers (PBMs) to use the fee-for-service preferred  drug  list  in
  developing  their  formulary,  require  MCPs  and  PBMs to reimburse
  retail pharmacies and 340B covered entity providers for each drug at
  the  National  Average  Drug  Acquisition  Cost  (NADAC)  or  the
  fee-for-service  reimbursement  rate  plus  a  tiered  volume-based
  dispensing fee, require a dispensing fee set by the Commissioner  to
  be  an  amount of at least $10.18, prohibit MCPs from denying retail
  pharmacies  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  their  network,
  reimburse  contract  pharmacies  under  the 340B program under a fee
  schedule based on fair market principles and not on a percentage  of
  a  claim's total reimbursement or net margin, and prohibit PBMs from
  limiting an individual's choice to  receive  their  medication  from
  their local, non-mail order pharmacy of choice (S.5136).
  * NEW  PART WW -- The Senate advances language to expand the number of
  facilities in the young adults with medical fragility  demonstration
  program.
  * NEW  PART  XX  --  The  Senate  advances  language to exempt managed
  long-term  care  transportation  from  the  brokers  that  will  be
  responsible  for  managing  non-emergency medical transportation for
  Medicaid (S.4788).
  * NEW  PART  YY  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  reject  the
  administrative changes to the Health Home Program.
  * NEW  PART  AAA  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to redefine the
  qualifications for clinical peer reviewers used in external appeals,
  and expands their role to include  utilization  reviews  (S.8113  of
  2022).
  * NEW  PART  BBB  -- The Senate advances language to establish a grant
  program to build reproductive healthcare  provider  capacity  within
  the state, fund uncompensated care, and provide financial support to
  organizations  providing practical support to individuals within and
  traveling to the State (S.348-B).
  * NEW  PART  CCC  --  The  Senate  advances  language  directing  the
  Department  of  Health  to  establish  rates  of  reimbursement  for
  pediatric diagnostic and treatment centers for services provided  on
  or after April 1, 2023, to children with medical fragility.
  * NEW  PART  DDD  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  require the
  Department  of  Health  to  establish  a  Director  of  Hospice  and
  Palliative Care Access and Quality within the Office of Primary Care
  and Health Systems Management (S.4858).
  * NEW  PART FFF -- The Senate advances language to provide funding for
  certified home health agencies  and  hospice  programs  to  increase
  their services in underserved or hard to serve areas of the state.
  * NEW  PART  GGG -- The Senate advances language to codify the quality
  incentive program for managed care providers and provide funding for
  the program (S.3146).
 
Medicaid Inspector General, Office of the
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $57.4 million.
 
Higher Education Facilities Capital Matching Grants Program (HECap)
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of no  new  capital
  funding as follows:
  o Restores  $45  million  for  HECap and provides an additional $5
  million.
  o Adds $30 million for Green HECap.
 
Higher Education Services Corporation (HESC)
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $60.8
  million.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $1.1 billion as
  follows:
  o Restores:
  -$2 million for the Nursing Faculty Scholarship
  -$1 million for the Social Worker Loan Forgiveness Program
  -$50,000 for the  New  York  Young  Farmers  Loan  Forgiveness
  Program
  o Adds  $7.5  million  to  increase  the  maximum TAP ceiling from
  $80,000 to $110,000.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4006-B)
  * NEW PART RR -- The Senate advances language to increase the  maximum
  TAP eligibility income cap from $80,000 to $110,000 (S.3474).
 
Homeland Security and Emergency Services, Division of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  *  The  Senate concurs with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $138.2 million.
 
Aids to Localities (S. 4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $8.9
  billion by restoring $1.8 million in Legislative grants.
 
Capital Projects (S. 4004-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive All Funds recommendation of $93
  million by adding $50 million to support the Volunteer Fire Services
  Capital Fund.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4005-B)
  * PART G -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to  establish  a
  hazard mitigation loan fund.
  * PART  H  --  The  Senate  modifies  the Executive proposal regarding
  volunteer firefighters by  removing  language  providing  localities
  with  the option to provide a nominal fee to volunteer firefighters.
  The Senate accepts the part of the Executive  proposal  that  allows
 
  the  Office  of  Fire  Prevention  and  Control to give a stipend to
  volunteer firefighters for completing certain  firefighter  training
  and advances language to increase the income tax credit to volunteer
  firefighters  from  $200  to  $800  and to allow the claiming of the
  income tax credit and existing property tax exemptions.
 
Homes and Community Renewal
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $181.6
  million, an increase of $46.9  million  or  34.8  percent  from  SFY
  2022-23  levels,  with  modifications  to  provide  funding  for the
  following:
  o $10 million for a Statewide Rent Registry.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $110.8
  million, a decrease of $427.5  million  or  79.4  percent  from  SFY
  2022-23  levels,  with  modifications  to  provide  funding  for the
  following:
  o The Senate provides $250 million for the Housing Access  Voucher
  Program (HAVP).
  o Restores:
  -$50 million for Land Banks and Land Trusts.
  -$35  million  for the Homeowner Protection Program (HOPP) and
  adds an additional $5 million for a total of $40 million.
  o The Senate adds $1 million for the Fair Housing Testing  Program
  for a total of $3 million.
  o The  Senate  restores  $150,000  for  the  Association  for
  Neighborhood and Housing Development, and  adds  $50,000  for  a
  total of $200,000.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $479.7
  million,  a  decrease of $4.8 billion or 91 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels, with modifications to provide funding for the following:
  o Restores:
  - $350  million  for  the  New  York  City  Housing  Authority
  (NYCHA).
  -  $50 million for Public Housing Authorities outside the City
  of New York.
  -$100  million  for  the  Mitchell  Lama  Preservation  and
  Homeownership Program.
  -$7  million  for  the Small Rental Development Initiative and
  adds $13 million for a total of $20 million.
  o Adds $250 million for the  Infrastructure  Support  Fund  for  a
  total of $500 million.
  o The Senate adds $4.6 million for the RESTORE program for a total
  of $6 million.
  o The Senate adds $3 million for the Access to Homes program for a
  total of $4 million.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4006-B)
  * PART  F -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to set housing
  growth targets by removing mandatory requirements and  overrides  of
  local  zoning,  doubling total available incentives for smart growth
  to $500 million in State assistance, supporting the  creation  of  a
  land  use  advisory council to review municipal growth over the next
 
  three  years,  and  awarding  the  $500  million  in  incentives  to
  municipalities  that achieve target goals. The Senate recognizes and
  supports the need for an expanded and  diversified  housing  supply,
  particularly  affordable  housing,  in  order to address the State's
  affordability  crisis  while  recognizing  the  critical  role  of
  community  input  in meeting development needs with community buy-in
  to  different  development  strategies.  The  Senate  will  further
  consider  programs,  policies,  and  incentives  to  facilitate  the
  development of a robust and sustainable housing  supply  across  the
  State in conjunction with partners in State government.
  * PART  G  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  require municipalities in the New York  City  metro  area  to  amend
  their zoning to encourage transit-oriented development.
  * PART  H  --  The  Senate  modifies the Executive proposal to require
  local boards to submit certain information related  to  zoning,  and
  the  construction, rehabilitation and conversion of buildings to the
  Commissioner of the Division  of  Homes  and  Community  Renewal  to
  include  language  that  binds  the  program  in  statute  to  funds
  allocated by the Executive to ensure localities obtain technical and
  financial assistance, and removes mandatory reporting requirements.
  * PART I -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  expand  the  circumstances  under  which  localities  may consider a
  dwelling abandoned.
  * PART J -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal  to  amend  the
  residential  requirements  for  multiple  dwellings  for  commercial
  conversions to combine its regulatory changes  with  the  commercial
  conversion  tax  incentive  recommended  in  Part P of the Executive
  Budget  (S.5080)  and  adds  an  opt-in  commercial  conversion  tax
  incentive  outside  of  New  York  City, as well as addressing labor
  standards.
  * PART K -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  allow  the  City  of New York to establish a program which addresses
  the legalization or the conversion of basement and  cellar  dwelling
  units.
  * PART  L  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  eliminate the residential 12.0 floor area ratio (FAR) requirement in
  New York City.
  * PART M -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  update tax abatement incentives for affordable multiple dwellings in
  New  York  City, and intends to address an updated tax abatement for
  the City of New York outside of the budget process (S.4709).
  * PART N -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  provide  an  opt-in  tax  exemption for new multi-family development
  outside of New York City.
  * PART O -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  provide  homeowners with an opt-in tax exemption for the creation of
  new accessory dwelling units outside of New York City.
  * PART P -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  create  a  tax  incentive program to convert commercial buildings to
  residential dwellings in New York City and combines  the  provisions
  with ELFA Part J of the Executive Budget.
  * PART  Q  --  The  Senate modifies the Executive proposal to increase
  funding for the Rural Preservation Program  from  $5.36  million  to
  $7.75  million  and  increase  the  funding  for  the  Neighborhood
  Preservation Program funding from $12.8 million to  $17.78  million.
  In addition, the Senate provides carve outs of $125,000 each for the
  Neighborhood and Rural Preservation Coalitions.
 
  * PART  R  --The  Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  extend the 421-a completion deadline, with an intention  to  address
  projects on an individual basis outside of the budget process.
  * NEW  PART  GG  --  The  Senate advances a new proposal to create the
  Housing Access Voucher Program to provide rental assistance  in  the
  form  of vouchers to individuals who are homeless or facing imminent
  risk of becoming homeless (S.568-A).
  * NEW PART JJ -- The Senate advances a new proposal to require the New
  York City Housing Authority to compensate residents for  disruptions
  in vital services such as utilities (S.546).
  * NEW  PART  OO -- The Senate advances a new proposal establishing the
  Special Commission on Affordable Housing (S.9462 of 2022).
  * The Senate supports advancing tenant protections that align with the
  core principles of Good Cause Eviction.
  * The  Senate  supports  the  concepts  and  core  principles  of  the
  short-term  rentals bill and intends to address the issue outside of
  the budget process.
 
Hudson River Valley Greenway Communities Council
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive recommendation of $245,000.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive recommendation of $250,000.
 
Human Rights, Division of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $28.9
  million,  an  increase  of  $7.8  million  or  37.5 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Indigent Legal Services, Office of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $7.3 million.
 
Aids to Localities (S. 4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $359.3
  million as follows:
  o Adds  $25  million for the Assigned Counsel Program ("18-B"), to
  support the modification of Article VII PPGG Part P.
  o Adds $10 million for the Parental Representation Program.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
  * PART P -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal  regarding  the
  Assigned Counsel Program by raising the hourly rate for attorneys to
  $180  for  downstate  counties  and $158 for upstate counties, to be
  phased in over a period of five  years.  The  Senate  also  advances
  language  that will require the State and counties to share the cost
  of the rate increase (S.1777-A).
 
Information Technology Services, Office of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
 
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $863.2 million, an increase of $36.1 million or 4.4 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
  o The  Senate  provides $500,000 for an inventory of technological
  assets.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $130.7  million,  an  increase of $15 million or 13 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4005-B)
  * NEW PART VV -- The Senate advances language  to  require  all  state
  agencies  to perform an inventory of technological assets, including
  all  hardware  and  software,  for  the  purpose  of  identifying
  vulnerabilities and capacity needs.
 
Inspector General, Office of the State
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $9.8 million, an increase of $1.4 million or  16  percent  from  SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Interest on Lawyer Account
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $2.2 million.
 
Aids to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $52 million.
 
Judiciary
 
Legislature and Judiciary (S.4001-A)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the  Office of Court Administration All Funds
  recommendation of $3.4 billion as follows:
  o Adds $19 million to support a two-year pilot program in New York
  City to operate Family Court until midnight.
  o The Senate proposes to modify the Office of Court Administration
  budget to require mandatory reporting  to  the  Legislature  and
  Executive  subject  to  withholdings  of  non-personal  service
  funding for failure to comply.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
  * PART U -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  apply a variable, market-based interest rate to court judgments.
  * NEW  PART  RR  --  The Senate advances language to create a two-year
  pilot program in  New  York  City  to  operate  Family  Court  until
  midnight (S.2355).
  * NEW  PART  XX  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  authorize
  audio-visual recording in judicial proceedings (S.160).
  * NEW  PART  DDD  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  increase
  transparency  in  the  Unified Court System, including requiring the
  Office of Court Administration to report certain information to  the
  other branches of government.
 
Judicial Conduct, Commission on
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $8.1 million.
 
Judicial Nomination, Commission on
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $30,000.
 
Judicial Screening Committee
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $38,000.
 
Justice Center for Protection of People with Special Needs
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $60.9 million.
 
Aids to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $800,000.
 
Labor, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $1.1  billion, a decrease of $111.3 million or 10.2 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $6.2 billion,  a
  decrease of $4 billion or 39 percent from SFY 2022-23 levels:
  o Restores $19.4 million in funding for Senate priorities.
  o Adds  $4.2  million  for  the  Cornell  Industrial  Labor School
  Climate Jobs Institute.
  o Adds $1.5  million  for  the  Cornell  Industrial  Labor  School
  Cannabis Workforce Initiative.
  o Adds  $2.5  million  for  other  Senate  Legislative Priorities,
  including:
  -$750,000 for the Edward Malloy Apprenticeship Program.
  -$250,000 for a Non-Traditional  Employment  for  Women  Child
  Care pilot program.
  -$250,000  for  the  Workforce  Development  Institute  Hazard
  Abatement Program.
  o Adds  $1  million  for  New  Jewish  Home  for  training  for
  under-privileged youth to become Certified Nurse Assistants, and
  using this model to expand these training services Statewide.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4006-B)
  * PART  S  --  The  Senate  intentionally omits the Executive proposal
  related to minimum wage indexing. The Senate  supports  raising  the
  minimum wage and then indexing the minimum wage to inflation after a
 
  sufficient increase to ensure that New Yorkers earn a living wage to
  support their basic needs and the needs of their families.
  * PART  T  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  require New York City to establish an Office of Community Hiring and
  Workforce Development.
  * NEW PART AA -- The Senate advances language to  expand  the  Healthy
  Terminals Act to include New York Stewart International Airport as a
  covered  airport  location  for  purposes  of  establishing specific
  standards for prevailing wage rates for airport workers (S.3571).
  * NEW PART BB -- The Senate advances  language  to  extend  paid  sick
  leave to domestic workers (S.1801).
  * The  Senate supports reviewing options to address access to benefits
  for those who are ineligible for traditional unemployment benefits.
  * The Senate supports  exploring  the  use  of  conduit  financing  to
  provide  unemployment  insurance  premium  relief to business owners
  across the State.
 
Labor Management Committees
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $37.8 million, an increase of $12.3 million or 48.3 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Law, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $342 million, an increase of $21.8 million compared to  SFY  2022-23
  levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $2.75 million, a decrease of $3.75 million compared to  SFY  2022-23
  levels.
 
Lieutenant Governor, Office of the
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive recommendation of $746,000,
  which is no change from SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Local Government Assistance
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $2.5  million  for the Financial Restructuring Board, unchanged from
  SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $754.2  million,  unchanged  from  SFY  2022-23  levels,  with
  modifications to provide funding for the following:
  o $210 million in additional funding for  Aid  and  Incentives  to
  Municipalities  (AIM),  distributed  proportionally  across  the
  State to current AIM recipients.
  o $300,000 for the Village of New Paltz for  expenses  related  to
  police and fire services associated with SUNY New Paltz.
 
  o $289,000 for the City of Kingston for Sojourner Truth Park.
  o $33,000 for the Town of Ulster for Sojourner Truth Park.
  o $250,000  for  the  Aid  and Incentives for Municipalities (AIM)
  Redesign Task Force.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4005-B)
  * PART AA -- The Senate accepts the  Executive's  proposal  to  extend
  various  commercial  property  and  sales tax incentives in New York
  City.
  * PART BB -- The Senate intentionally omits the  Executive's  proposal
  to  repeal the County-Wide Shared Services Initiative payment to the
  North Shore Water Authority.
  * NEW PART LL -- The Senate advances language to establish a New  York
  Aid  and  Incentives  for  Municipalities  (AIM) redesign task force
  (S.770). This task force would study the  current  AIM  formula  and
  distribution  levels,  and  explore  reinstating AIM funding for New
  York City.
  * NEW PART AAA -- The Senate advances language to increase  monitoring
  and  oversight  of Orange County Industrial Development Agency (IDA)
  activities  and  decision  making,  including  but  not  limited  to
  contracting and payment in lieu of taxes agreements.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
  * NEW  PART  ZZZ -- The Senate advances language to repeal the Madison
  Square Garden tax exemption and send all future  revenues  generated
  from  property  taxes  on  such  property  to  the  Metropolitan
  Transportation Authority (MTA).
 
Mental Health, Office of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $2.3
  billion  by  modifying  appropriation  language to include reporting
  requirements to notify the Legislature before residential, community
  and State-operated beds are opened.
 
Aids to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $2.7
  billion as follows:
  -Adds  $130  million  to support an 8.5 percent Cost-of-Living
  Adjustment (COLA).
  -Adds $10 million to establish a Daniel's Law  Pilot  Program.
  The  Pilot  Program  would support new and existing programs
  that respond to the  needs  of  individuals  involved  in  a
  mental health crisis. Funding would be used to establish the
  utilization  of  best  practices,  create  reporting
  requirements, and incentivize local governments  to  improve
  services  related  to  mental  health  crisis  awareness and
  response.
  - Adds $5 million in Legislative grants.
  * $3 million to support restoration of prior year grants.
  -$3  million  to  support  workgroups  to  study  and  issue
  recommendations  on suicide prevention in LGBTQ+, Black, and
  Latina children and youth.
  -Adds $1.06 million to support Comprehensive Care  Center  for
  Eating Disorders.
  -Adds  $300,000  for  the  Veteran's  Mental  Health  Training
  Initiative.
 
  -Reduces $700,000 for intentionally omitting HMH Part GG.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $1.5
  billion as follows:
  o Modifies  appropriation  language  to  include  reporting
  requirements  to  notify  the  Legislature  before  residential,
  community and State-operated beds are opened.
  o Carves out up to $9 million to support beds operated by Fountain
  House Inc.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4007-B)
  * NEW PART ZZ -- The Senate advances language to create workgroups  to
  study  and  issue  recommendations  on suicide prevention in LGBTQ+,
  Black, and Latina children and youth.
  * NEW PART HHH -- The Senate advances language to create  a  workgroup
  to study and issue recommendations on implementing Daniel's Law, and
  create  a  pilot  program  to  support  non-police, trauma-informed,
  community-led responses to mental health, alcohol, and substance use
  crises.
 
Mental Hygiene, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $600
  million as follows:
 
  o Adds $500 million appropriation to support 8.5 percent COLA.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4007-B)
  * PART  DD  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to provide a
  2.5  percent  cost-of-living  adjustment  by  increasing  the
  cost-of-living  adjustment  to  8.5  percent  and  indexing  future
  cost-of-living adjustments to the  consumer  price  index  (Part  of
  S.1291).
  * PART  EE -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal extending the
  managed long-term  care  statute  for  the  Office  of  People  with
  Developmental  Disabilities (OPWDD) by reducing the extension to one
  year.
  * PART FF -- The Senate accepts the  Executive  proposal  to  increase
  flexibility  in  delegating nursing tasks by allowing direct support
  staff in OPWDD community-based programs to perform certain tasks, if
  under  the  instruction  of  the  service  recipient  or  their
  representative, and supervised by a registered professional nurse.
  * PART  GG -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  create  a  "qualified  mental  health  associate"  credential  for
  paraprofessionals  who  provide  services  for  the Office of Mental
  Health.
  * PART HH -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal  to  allow  the
  Office  of  Mental  Health  and the Office of Addiction Services and
  Supports to jointly license certified  community  behavioral  health
  clinics and create an Indigent Care Pool to compensate providers who
  suffer losses due to uncompensated care.
  * PART  II  --  The  Senate  accepts the Executive proposal to require
  commercial insurance coverage of certain behavioral health services,
  exempt certain behavioral health services and substance use disorder
  drugs from preauthorization or utilization review,  require  payment
  parity  for  telehealth mental health services, create penalties for
 
  payment parity violations, and require DFS to promulgate regulations
  related to behavioral health  and  substance  use  disorder  network
  adequacy.
  * PART JJ -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to enhance the
  authority  of  the Commissioner to impose penalties on providers for
  failing to comply with operating certificates or the Mental  Hygiene
  Law  by  including  protections  for  attempts made in good faith to
  comply with applicable operating certificates and the law.
  * NEW  PART  EEE  --  The  Senate  advances  language  to  direct  the
  Commissioner  to  establish  a  maternal  mental health workgroup to
  study and issue recommendations related to maternal  mental  health,
  perinatal, and postpartum mood and anxiety disorders (S.2359).
 
People with Developmental Disabilities, Office for
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $2.4 billion.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $4.9
  billion as follows:
  o Adds  $290  million  to  support  an  8.5 percent Cost-of-Living
  Adjustment (COLA).
  o Adds $1 million  to  support  Legislative  Grants,  including  a
  $450,000 restoration to support prior year Legislative Grants.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $119.5 million.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4007-B)
  * NEW PART NN -- The Senate advances language to create an independent
  intellectual  and  developmental  disability  ombudsman  program
  (S.3108).
 
Planning Council, Developmental Disabilities
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $4.76 million.
 
Metropolitan Transportation Authority
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $892.2
  million,  a decrease of $9.6 million or 1.1 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels.
  * The Senate rejects the MTA's proposed biennial fare  hikes  in  2023
  and 2025.
  * The  Senate  supports  the  MTA implementing a pilot program to test
  providing two free buses in each borough.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
  * PART A -- The Senate accepts in principle the Executive proposal  to
  create  a  five-year  pilot  program  for  the operation of a camera
  enforcement program on MTA buses for vehicles illegally  stopped  or
 
  parked in bus stops and lanes, bike lanes, double parking areas, and
  in general no standing zones and adds other conforming language.
  * PART  B  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  establish a speed camera  program  for  the  Triborough  Bridge  and
  Tunnel Authority.
  * PART  C  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  permanently extend the MTA's authorization to enter into alternative
  financing  arrangements  such  as  value  capture  with  locals  and
  permanently extend several MTA procurement authorizations.
  * PART  D  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  require New York City to fully cover the net  paratransit  operating
  expenses  of  the  MTA,  to  fully  cover the MTA's net fare revenue
  difference from providing reduced Metro Card rates for K-12 students
  within the City, and to  fully  cover  forgone  revenue  related  to
  Payroll Mobility Tax exemptions.
  * PART  E  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  authorize  the  MTA  to  expand  insurance  coverage  through  its
  Owner-Controlled  Insurance  Program  (OCIP)  to  include  projects
  related to buses, bridges, and tunnels, including reconstruction.
  * PART G --  The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  extending
  binding  arbitration  provisions in facilitating settlements between
  the MTA and labor representatives for two years.
  * PART H -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to  expand  the
  aggravated  assault  provisions  involving  physical  injury against
  transportation workers to include traffic checkers,  motor  vehicles
  license  examiners,  motor vehicle representatives, highway workers,
  motor carrier investigators, and motor vehicles inspectors by adding
  ferry workers and including highway  work  zone  safety  protections
  (S.4647).
  * PART  I  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to expand the
  current MTA transit ban law to ban people  who  assault  passengers,
  customers,  or  MTA  contractors  and  to  expand the law to include
  offenses committed  "adjacent  to"  the  Authority's  transportation
  facilities,  and  authorize  courts  to ban offenders outside of the
  county where the sentencing judge sits. The  modification  prohibits
  the  Authority  from  using facial recognition technology to enforce
  the bans.
  * PART Q -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  increase  the  Metropolitan  Commuter  Transportation  Mobility  Tax
  ("Payroll Mobility Tax").
  * PART R -- The Senate  modifies  the  Executive  proposal  to  direct
  funding  from  downstate  casino  licenses  to  the  Metropolitan
  Transportation Authority (MTA) by ensuring that recurring casino tax
  revenues will be dedicated to education.
  * PART UUU --  The  Senate  advances  legislation  including  the  Far
  Rockaway LIRR station in the MTA's Atlantic Ticket program (S.4719).
  * PART AAAA -- The Senate advances a new proposal to increase MTA data
  transparency  by  requiring  individual contract and project numbers
  and information and requiring more detail on capital  and  financial
  plan expenditures (S.3545 of 2023 and S.2768 of 2022).
  * NEW  PART  BBBB  --  The  Senate advances legislation increasing the
  corporate  franchise  tax  surcharge  levied  for  the  Metropolitan
  Transportation  Authority  from  30%  of State liabilities to 45% of
  State liabilities.
  * NEW PART DDDD -- The Senate advances language authorizing  New  York
  City  to  establish  a  parking  permit  system  for  residential
  neighborhoods in the City. Revenues from the parking  permit  system
  will be dedicated to the MTA.
 
  * NEW  PART  EEEE  --  The Senate advances legislation to exempt local
  governments in Dutchess, Orange, Putnam, and Rockland from  the  MTA
  payroll  tax  and  residents  of  those  counties  from supplemental
  vehicle registration and license fees used to fund the MTA.
  * NEW  PART  FFFF  --  The  Senate  advances  language  establishing a
  surcharge on transportation network company rides that occur in  the
  City  of  New York to be dedicated to the MTA, and advances language
  establishing a surcharge on  transportation  network  company  rides
  that  occur  outside the City of New York which will be dedicated to
  Upstate and Downstate non-MTA transit funding.
 
Military and Naval Affairs, Division of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $150 million.
 
Aids to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $1.5 million.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $180 million.
 
Mortgage Agency (SONYMA)
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $76.8 million, unchanged from SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $207  million,  an increase of $51.7 million or 1.3 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Motor Vehicles, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $118.9
  million, an increase of $2.4 million or 2.1 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels.
 
Aids to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of $24.8
  million, unchanged from SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate concurs with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $333.97
  million,  a  decrease  of  $95.6  million  or  22.4 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4008-B)
  * PART J -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to extend DMV's
  authorization to permit autonomous vehicle demonstrations and  tests
  for  one  year  until  April  1, 2024 by accepting the extension and
  including vehicle  to  vehicle  communication  technology  to  their
  testing and demonstrations.
 
  * PART  L  -- The Senate modifies the Executive Proposal to expand the
  "dangerous driving offenses"  triggering  DMV  refusal  to  issue  a
  driver's  license  to  include  per se DWI (.08 BAC), aggravated DWI
  (.18 BAC), first- and second-degree  vehicular  assault,  aggravated
  vehicular  assault, first- and second-degree vehicular manslaughter,
  and aggravated vehicular homicide to add mandatory  installation  of
  ignition  interlock  devices  for  DWI  convictions  (S.775)  and
  dedicating DWI surcharges  revenues  to  STOP-DWI  program  expenses
  (S.2712).
  * PART  M  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to change the
  portion of fees a county clerk may receive from the DMV for handling
  motor vehicle-related services.
  * PART N -- The Senate modifies the Executive's proposal  to  increase
  penalties  on commercial vehicles that park overnight in residential
  areas in New York City by incorporating  higher  fines  (S.518)  and
  addressing  the issue of overnight school bus parking in residential
  neighborhoods (S.1186).
 
The Senate supports efforts to modernize the DMV's Insurance Information
and Enforcement System for the Compulsory Insurance  Program,  including
adoption of an online verification system.
 
National And Community Service
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of $30.9
  million, a decrease of $2,281  or  0.01  percent  from  SFY  2022-23
  levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive recommendation of $454,000, an
  increase of $22,000 or 5.1 percent from SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Olympic Regional Development Authority
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of $14.1
  million.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive recommendation of $90 million.
 
Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $353.7
  million.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of $11.6
  million.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of  $344.9  million
  by  restoring  $50 million in funding for infrastructure projects at
  State parks.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
 
  * PART MM -- The Senate accepts in principle the Executive proposal to
  expand funding for  snowmobile  trail  development  and  maintenance
  through  an  increase  to  snowmobile  registration fees and makes a
  technical change to grant application requirements.
  * PART  NN -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  alter pleasure vessel equipment standards.
  * NEW  PART  CCC  --  The  Senate  advances  language  requiring  the
  Department of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation to develop
  a parks passport program (S.261).
  * NEW  PART  DDD  --  The Senate advances language to study a proposed
  expansion of the Long Island Motor Parkway (S.3011).
 
Power Authority, New York
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $7.5
  million.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
  * PART  XX -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  authorize NYPA to develop and operate  renewable  energy  generating
  programs  and  use  the  proceeds  to establish the Renewable Energy
  Access and Community Help Program. The  Senate  has  already  passed
  S.4134, which addresses the issue in a comprehensive manner.
  * PART  YY  --  The  Senate  accepts  the Executive proposal to extend
  NYPA's current authorization to procure renewable products, allocate
  and sell renewable products that it produces or procures  to  public
  entities and NYPA customers by 20 years to June 30, 2044.
 
Prevention of Domestic Violence, Office for the
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $5.1
  million as follows:
  o Reduces $300,000 due to intentionally omitting Article VII  PPGG
  Part I related to the modernization of domestic and gender-based
  violence model policy.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All Funds recommendation of $7
  million.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4005-B)
  * PART  I  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  modernize gender-based violence policies and  procedures  and  takes
  the  position  that  such a proposal requires significant discussion
  with various stakeholders and should be  addressed  outside  of  the
  budget process.
 
Prosecutorial Conduct, Commission on
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $1.8 million. The  Senate  urges  the  Governor  to  effectuate  all
  necessary  appointments  to  the Prosecutorial Conduct Commission as
  soon as possible so the Commission can undertake its critical work.
 
Public Employment Relations Board
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $4.9 million, an increase of  $636,000  or  14.7  percent  from  SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation to
  zero out funding for the modernization program of SFY  2022-23  that
  becomes a reappropriation this year.
 
Ethics and Lobbying in Government, Commission on
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $7.8 million.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4005-B)
  * PART Z -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to stagger  term
  durations for appointees to the Commission on Ethics and Lobbying in
  Government.
 
Public Service, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation of $111.8
  million.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $205.8
  million,  with  modifications  to  codify  the  Energy Affordability
  Guarantee and to clarify that any energy usage cap applies  only  to
  energy usage subject to the Guarantee.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
  * PART  VV  --  The  Senate  modifies  the  Executive proposal to make
  permanent  the  State's  current  authorization  to  allow  various
  agencies  to  finance  costs incurred on behalf of the Department of
  Public Service from assessments on cable  television  companies  and
  public utilities by reducing it to a one-year extension.
  * NEW PART LLL -- The Senate advances language to require utilities to
  submit  details  on  their  customer  arrears  to the Public Service
  Commission and directs the Commission to issue a report on  customer
  arrears  across  the  state,  as  well  as  the  effects  of  the
  COVID-19-related state of emergency on the  provision  of  electric,
  gas,  water,  and  telephone  services to residential and commercial
  customers (Parts of S.1316 and S.1293).
  * NEW PART MMM -- The Senate advances language  to  align  the  Public
  Service  Law  with  the  emission  reduction mandates of the Climate
  Leadership  and  Community  Protection  Act,  ensure  an  equitable
  transition  from  the  gas distribution system to a renewable system
  for heating  and  hot  water,  eliminate  entitlement  for  new  gas
  connections,  and  cap the energy burden of low income households to
  6% of their income (S.2016).
 
State, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
 
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $139.3  million,  an  increase of $21.2 million or 17.9 percent from
  SFY 2022-23 levels, with modifications to provide  funding  for  the
  following projects:
  o $5  million  for  establishing  the  Office of Racial Equity and
  Social Justice.
  o $5 million  for  establishing  the  Office  of  Native  American
  Affairs.
  o $1  million  establishing  the Commission on Asian Americans and
  Pacific Islanders.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $179.2  million,  a  decrease  of  $24 million or 11.8 percent, with
  modifications to provide funding for the following:
  o Restores $20 million for Asian  American  and  Pacific  Islander
  (AAPI)  equity  budget  coalition  priorities,  and  adds $12.25
  million for the  Asian  American  and  Pacific  Islander  (AAPI)
  equity budget coalition priorities.
  o Adds $30 million for the Office of New Americans.
  o Adds $7 million for the Local Code Enforcement Program.
  o Restores  $1.35  million for the Public Utility Law Project, and
  adds $650,000 for a total of $2 million.
  o Restores $2 million for the New York State Immigration Coalition
  and adds $500,000 for this purpose.
  o Adds $1 million for Native American Health Clinics.
  o Adds $224,000  for  State  Opportunity  Centers  in  Westchester
  County to support the growing immigrant population.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $202
  million, which is no change from SFY 2022-23.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
 
  * NEW PART MM -- The Senate advances language establishing the  Office
  of Native American Affairs to act as a centralized office for Native
  American  nations  to  access information on State programs that are
  applicable to Native Americans (S.4648).
  * NEW PART NN -- The Senate advances language  establishing  an  Asian
  American  and  Pacific  Islander  (AAPI)  Commission, which would be
  tasked with developing  statewide  programs  and  policies  to  both
  recognize  and  encourage  the growth of the AAPI communities in the
  state (S.1051).
  * NEW PART QQ -- The Senate advances language creating the  Office  of
  Racial  Equity  and  Social  Justice  to serve as the official State
  planning and coordinating office  for  changes  in  race  or  social
  justice  policies,  practices,  and  in  the  allocation  of  State
  resources. It is  essential  that  the  Office  consider  plans  for
  eliminating  institutional  racism  and  improving racial equity and
  social justice (S.1359).
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4008-B)
  * PART T -- The Senate accepts the Executive's  proposal  to  simplify
  the  process  by  which  a  residential  condominium  designates the
  secretary of state as agent for service of process.
  * PART V -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  expand authorization to perform natural organic reduction.
 
  * PART  X  --  The  Senate  modifies the Executive proposal to provide
  flexibility under the Open  Meetings  Law  (OML)  to  public  bodies
  organized  for  disability  matters by advancing language to specify
  which public  bodies  would  be  able  to  host  fully-virtual  open
  meetings,  link  the  term  "individuals  with  disabilities" to the
  existing  parameters  set  by  Human  Rights  Law,  and  allow  for
  individuals  with  disabilities  to be counted toward a quorum under
  the existing hybrid OML system (S.1525).
  * PART Y -- The Senate accepts the  Executive  proposal  to  establish
  traineeships  for  nail  salon  employees and alter requirements for
  cosmetologists and barbering apprentices.
 
State Police, Division of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $1.1 billion.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $237.5 million.
 
Article VII Proposals (S.4005-B)
  * PART E -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to establish  a
  statewide  repository  of  criminal  shooting incidents by including
  language  to  prohibit  the  inclusion  of  personally  identifiable
  information  in  the  repository.  The  Senate  opposes data in this
  repository being used to establish or  facilitate  any  policy  that
  would lead to the over-policing of neighborhoods.
 
State University of New York (SUNY)
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $11.6 billion as
  follows:
  o Modifies  the endowment to ensure Comptroller oversight of funds
  and grants the SUNY Trustees authority to determine  eligibility
  for the endowment.
  o Provides additional:
  -$151 million for operating aid.
  -$14.6 million for the elimination of graduate student fees.
  -$7.3 million for SUNY Educational Opportunity Centers.
  -$6 million for SUNY Educational Opportunity Programs.
  -$350,000 for SUNY Black Leadership Institute.
  o Restores:
  -$68  million  for  SUNY  Hospitals  Debt  Service. The Senate
  understands and continues to support the critical role  that
  SUNY  Hospitals  play  in  providing  critical  safety  net
  coverage.
  -$1 million for SUNY Maritime.
  -$1 million for Mental Health Services.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of  $445.4  million
  as follows:
  o Provides additional:
  -$16.7  million  in additional operating aid for the community
  colleges.
 
  -$11.2 million for the FIT County Chargeback.
  -$1.7  million  for  the  New  York  City  Cornell Cooperative
  Extension Program.
  o Restores $5.4 million for child care centers.
  * The Senate omits language requiring SUNY to submit a plan to DOB  to
  operate in the future without a base aid funding floor.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $1.7 billion as
  follows:
  o Restores:
  -$350 million in Flexible Capital.
  -$10 million for Maintenance of the EOP Centers.
  o Rejects $200 million for the  SUNY-Wide  Digital  Transformation
  Initiative.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4006-B)
  * PART  B  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  increase tuition at SUNY and CUNY.
  * PART C -- The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  ensure
  medication abortion access at SUNY and CUNY.
  * NEW PART CC -- The Senate advances language to eliminate current and
  future mandatory university fees to SUNY and CUNY graduate students,
  where  the  graduate  student  is  serving  either as a full-time or
  half-time graduate student worker (S.3500).
  * NEW PART PP -- The Senate advances language to  establish  the  SUNY
  Black Leadership Institute (S.4743).
  * NEW  PART  QQ  --  The Senate advances language to allow cadets that
  receive a SUNY Maritime scholarship to be allowed to use scholarship
  money on any cost associated with attendance (S.5083).
  * The Senate supports exploring options to raise additional  resources
  for  SUNY  through  increases to out-of-State tuition while ensuring
  that tuition remains competitive with other states' higher education
  systems.
 
Statewide Financial System
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of  $32
  million,  an  increase  of  $65,000  or 0.2 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels.
 
Tax Appeals, Division of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $3.4
  million,  an  increase  of  $72,400  or 2.1 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels.
 
Taxation and Finance, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $471.9
  million, consistent with SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
 
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $7.9
  million, an increase of  $1.0  million  or  12.6  percent  from  SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Temporary and Disability Assistance, Office of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation of $465.6
  million, a decrease of $186 million or 28.6 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $7.9 billion  as
  follows,  an  increase  of  $1.4  billion  or  20.5 percent from SFY
  2022-23 levels as follows:
  o Adds:
  -$389 million for  the  Emergency  Rental  Assistance  Program
  (ERAP) for a total of $639 million.
  -$5  million  for Legal Representation for Eviction Outside of
  NYC for a total of $40 million.
  -$5 million in additional support for the Refugee Resettlement
  Program, for a total of $7 million.
  -$1.5 million for the Disability Advocacy Program (DAP), for a
  total of $6.75 million.
  -$16 million to provide an allowance for the cost of diapers.
  -$20  million  for  a  30%  cap  on  rent  contributions  for
  HIV-positive individuals.
  -$5 million to support legislative initiatives.
  o Restores $3 million for the Double Up Food Bucks program.
  o Restores funding for the following TANF programs:
  -$5.9  million  for  the  Child  Care  Facilitated  Enrollment
  Demonstration Projects in New York City and Monroe Counties.
  -$2.5  million  for  the  Child  Care  Facilitated  Enrollment
  Demonstration  Welfare  Projects in the Capital District and
  Oneida County.
  -$800,000 for the Welfare to Careers Program.
  o The Senate supports reimbursing NYC for  29  percent  of  claims
  even  if  claims  exceed  the  $1  billion  appropriated for the
  Migrant Service and Assistance program.
  o The  Senate  supports  expanding  summer  youth  employment
  opportunities to a year-round initiative.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $128
  million, unchanged from SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4006-B)
  * PART X -- The Senate modifies the  Executive  proposal  to  increase
  access  to  education  and  economic stability for public assistance
  recipients by advancing language which creates  a  six-month  earned
  income disregard in certain circumstances (S.2144).
  * PART  Y  --  The  Senate  modifies the Executive proposal to provide
  reimbursement to victims of public assistance fraud to  include  the
  reimbursement of additional benefits (S.4736).
  * PART Z -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to authorize the
  pass-through  of  any  Federal  Supplemental Security Income Cost of
  Living Adjustment.
 
  * NEW PART II -- The Senate advances language to require local  social
  service  districts to cap rent contributions for HIV-positive people
  at 30 percent of their household income (S.183).
  * NEW PART KK -- The Senate advances language to require the Office of
  Temporary and Disability Assistance to establish a statewide program
  that  would automatically grant individuals and families who qualify
  for income-based  affordability  programs  eligibility  for  utility
  corporation  energy affordability programs and requires notification
  of  eligibility  to  other  relevant  affordability  programs  to
  participants (S.4548).
 
Thruway Authority
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
  * PART F -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to create a new
  mechanism  for DMV to block the registration of a vehicle based on a
  toll-related  offense,  increase  penalties  for  license  plate
  concealment,  and  authorize  law  enforcement  and the DMV to seize
  license  plate  obstructing  materials  by  replacing  it  with  the
  Senate's  Toll  Payer  Protection  Act  (S.492-A)  and  including
  additional public outreach language.
  * NEW PART VVV -- The Senate advances a new proposal  to  require  all
  locations  that sell E-ZPasses to allow for use of cash payments for
  E-ZPasses and waives E-ZPass deposit requirements for 60 days  after
  a toll increase (S.1361).
 
Transportation, Department of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $494.4 million,
  an increase of $50.8 million or 11.5 percent from SFY 2022-23 levels
  by adding $2 million for 10 State railroad inspectors.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $5.4 billion, an
  increase of $642.5 million or 13.5 percent from SFY  2022-23  levels
  as follows:
  * Adds:
  o $88.6  million in additional support for STOA funding to non-MTA
  transit systems which would provide a 20% increase, for a  total
  of $5 billion.
  o $10  million  in  additional  support for the Innovative Transit
  Mobility Pilot Program, for a total of $20 million.
  o $16 million for grants to municipalities  to  fund  DOT  project
  studies.  These  grants  will help municipalities fund initial
  designs for road and transit projects, including but not limited
  to the following studies:
  -State Route 35 and State Route 202.
  -State Route 9-A in Manhattan.
  -Brooklyn Boulevard.
  o $6 million for the Cross Bay Bridge Reimbursement Program.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of  $8.59  billion,
  an increase of $118.4 million or 1.4 percent from SFY 2022-23 levels
  as follows:
  o Adds:
 
  -$2  billion per year in additional support for the State Road
  and Bridge Program, for a total  of  $8  billion  over  four
  years,  to  support bringing roads to a state of good repair
  within the five-year Capital Plan. This  funding  will  also
  include,  but  not  limited  to,  supporting  the  following
  priority projects:
  - Complete Streets project in the Village of Kiryas Joel.
  - Renovation of Brookville Blvd in Queens.
  - Running Track Bridge Project in Rochester.
  - Cars on Main Street project along the  Buffalo  Historic
  Commercial Corridor.
  - Center  for  Community  Transportation project extending
  the Cayuga Waterfront.
  - Prospect Street Repairs into the  Seneca  Nation  Indian
  Hill Community.
  - Relocation of Freight Rail Lines in Lackawanna.
  -$200 million in additional support for the Consolidated Local
  Street  and Highway Improvement Program (CHIPS), for a total
  of $738.1 million.
  -$10 million for the Marchiselli Program, for a total  of  $50
  million.
  -$50 million for Bridge NY, for a total of $250 million.
  -$70  million  in  additional  support  for the Extreme Winter
  Recovery program, for a total of $150 million.
  -$30 million in  additional  support  for  the  State  Touring
  Routes Program, for a total of $130 million.
  -$5 million in additional support for Complete Streets project
  studies, for a total of $10 million.
  -$7  million  in  additional support for the Verrazzano Bridge
  residential and commercial toll rebate  program  to  account
  for upcoming toll increases, for a total of $26 million.
  -$15  million  in  additional  support  for the Maintenance of
  State Arterials roads.
  o The Senate supports $100 million for  a  new  five-year  capital
  plan for the Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority (NFTA).
  o The  Senate will additionally engage the Department on repairing
  and modernizing the state-owned portion of  the  Brooklyn-Queens
  Expressway,  as well as ensuring the Department engages with the
  City of New York with respect to  providing  the  assistance  it
  needs  to complete the capital work on the City-owned portion of
  the BQE.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
  * PART K -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal authorizing  New
  York City to lower its speed limit from 25 mph to 20 mph. The Senate
  also  underscores  the  importance  of  the City using a data-driven
  approach in setting and determining  speed  limits  to  ensure  that
  motor vehicles operate at safe speeds in a manner that optimizes all
  road users' safety and convenience.
  * PART  O  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  expand the type of commercial vehicles the Department may seize  for
  failed  inspection due to out-of-service safety-related defects. The
  Senate has already passed a commercial  motor  vehicle  and  stretch
  limousine  safety  package  pursuant to the Stretch Limousine Safety
  Task Force Report (S.1367, S.1368, S.1369, S.1370-A, S.1371, S.1442,
  and S.1443-A).
  * PART P -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal  to  add  "quick
  clearance"  language  allowing and requiring motorists involved in a
 
  crash to responsibly move away from the flow of traffic in a  timely
  manner  in  the event of a motor vehicle crash that does not involve
  an injury.
  * NEW PART OOO -- The Senate advances a new proposal to allow park and
  ride projects to be eligible for Marchiselli funding (S.5204).
  * NEW  PART  PPP  -- The Senate advances a new proposal to authorize a
  traffic flow and safety study of State Route 35 and State Route  202
  in Westchester County (S.4531-A).
  * NEW  PART RRR -- The Senate advances a new proposal to authorize the
  creation of the East  of  Hudson  Road  Salt  Reduction  Task  Force
  (S.2706).
  * NEW  PART  SSS  --  The  Senate advances legislation to increase the
  state reimbursement rate for local maintenance of arterial roads  by
  updating  the  reimbursement  formula to reflect inflation, and also
  indexes future reimbursement rates to the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
  in the Metropolitan Region (S.3529 of 2022).
  * NEW PART TTT -- The Senate advances  a  new  proposal  to  authorize
  cities  of  250,000  or  more  to establish scramble crosswalks near
  school zones on weekdays during school hours (S.2515-A).
  * NEW PART CCCC -- The Senate advances legislation authorizing a study
  of State Route 9-A in Manhattan.
 
Veterans' Affairs, Division of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $13.03  million,
  an  increase of $1.7 million or 15.4 percent from SFY 2022-23 levels
  as follows:
  o Adds $700,000 for the Mobile Veterans  Service  Centers,  for  a
  total of $1 million to provide a minimum of 10 mobile vehicles.
  o The  Senate supports including a Veterans Business Registry into
  the  Executive's  proposal  to  establish  a  Veterans  Memorial
  registry.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $12.96 million,
  an decrease of $1.5 million or 10.5 percent from SFY 2022-23  levels
  as follows:
  o Adds:
  -$250,000 to support the Alex R. Jimenez legacy program.
  -$2.5 million to support legislative initiatives.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  modifies  the Executive recommendation of $4 million, a
  decrease of $5 million or 55.6 percent from SFY  2022-23  levels  as
  follows  by  adding  $5  million for the Veteran's Nonprofit Capital
  Program.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4006-B)
  * NEW PART DD -- The Senate advances language to establish the Alex R.
  Jimenez legacy program to assist uniform service members,  veterans,
  reserve  component  members  and  their  families  to  secure  legal
  immigration status in the United States (S.3586).
 
Victim Services, Office of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
 
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $18.3 million.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate modifies the Executive All Funds recommendation of $198.6
  million  by restoring $12 million for the Victims of Crime Act grant
  program awardees.
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $1.5 million.
 
Workers' Compensation Board
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation of $212.4
  million, an increase of $6.2 million or 3 percent, from SFY 2022-23.
 
Welfare Inspector General, Office of
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $1.3
  million,  an  increase  of  $24,000  or 1.8 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels.
 
Miscellaneous Appropriations, Data Analytics
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $0,  a  decrease  of  $25  million  or  100 percent from SFY 2022-23
  levels. However, there is a total of $50 million available for  this
  purpose in reappropriation authority.
 
Miscellaneous  Appropriations,  Insurance  and  Securities  Fund Reserve
Guarantee
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
  * The Senate concurs with Executive All Funds recommendation  of  $1.6
  billion, unchanged from SFY 2022-23.
 
Miscellaneous Appropriations, State Equipment Finance Program
 
Capital Projects (S.4004-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $100
  million, unchanged from SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Miscellaneous  Appropriations,  Commercial  Gaming  Payment  Reduction
Offsets
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of $17.0
  million, an increase of  $7.0  million  or  70.0  percent  from  SFY
  2022-23 levels.
 
Miscellaneous Items
 
State Operations (S.4000-B)
 
  * The  Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $10 billion for
  Special Federal Emergency as follows:
  o Reduces appropriation by $8 billion to an amount consistent with
  the funding level prior to the pandemic.
  o Modifies  appropriation  language to require the approval of the
  Temporary President  of  the  Senate  and  the  Speaker  of  the
  Assembly  before appropriations can be utilized after the budget
  is enacted.
  * The Senate eliminates the Executive recommendation of $6 billion for
  Special Public Health Emergency.
  * The Senate modifies the Executive recommendation of $2  billion  for
  Special Emergency as follows:
  o Reduces appropriation by $1 billion to an amount consistent with
  the funding level provided prior to the pandemic.
  o Modifies  appropriation  language to require the approval of the
  Temporary President  of  the  Senate  and  the  Speaker  of  the
  Assembly  before appropriations can be utilized after the budget
  is enacted.
  * The Senate concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation  of  $773.9
  million for the Health Insurance Contingency Reserve.
  * The  Senate  concurs  with the Executive All Funds recommendation of
  $500 million for Public Security and Emergency Response.
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive All  Funds  recommendation  of
  $500 million for Reserve for Federal Audit Disallowance.
  * The  Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  recommendation of $292.4
  million for the Health Insurance Receipts Fund.
  * The Senate  concurs  with  the  Executive  reappropriation  of  $136
  million for Health Care and Mental Hygiene Worker Bonuses.
 
Aid to Localities (S.4003-B)
  * The Senate concurs with the Executive recommendation of $250 million
  for Raise the Age, unchanged from SFY 2022-23 levels.
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4005-B)
  * PART  CC  --  The  Senate  modifies the Executive proposal regarding
  sweeps  and  transfers  to  account  for  spending  changes  and
  intentionally omits the Executive proposals for a line of credit and
  short-term operational borrowing.
  * NEW  PART  PP  --  The Senate advances language to restore the State
  motto as it had been prior to 2020 (S.5528).
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4008-B)
  * PART EE -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal  to
  increase the bond cap of the Battery Park City Authority.
  * PART  II -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  provide for alternative procurement methodologies in the City of New
  York  and  intends  to  introduce  legislation  expediting  project
  delivery outside of the budget process.
  * PART  KK -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  expand owner-controlled and contractor-controlled insurance programs
  and intends to discuss this legislation with stakeholders outside of
  the budget process.
  * NEW PART XXX -- The Senate advances language to create a  searchable
  database  of  subsidy  and economic development benefits provided by
  local  authorities,  industrial  development  agencies,  and  local
  development  corporations  administered  by  the  Authorities Budget
  Office (S.1737).
 
  * NEW PART YYY -- The Senate advances language  to  repeal  provisions
  restricting the legal authority of members of the Public Authorities
  Control Board to review availability of sufficient funding (S.521).
 
Revenue
 
Article VII Proposal (S.4009-B)
  * PART  A  --  The  Senate accepts the Executive proposal to allow the
  Department of Tax and Finance to waive interest on late payments for
  taxpayers affected by disaster emergencies.
  * PART B --  The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  limit
  individuals  who  actively  work  at  a partnership from claiming an
  exemption from the MTA payroll mobility tax as limited partners.
  * PART C -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to allow farmers
  to claim a refund of excess Investment Tax Credits for  a  five-year
  period.
  * PART  D  -- The Senate modifies the Executive proposal to extend and
  enhance the Film Tax credit by removing language expanding  eligible
  costs  to  above-the-line  expenses,  removing  language  that would
  provide additional credits to relocated television series, expanding
  the costs eligible for the additional upstate credit  and  expanding
  the  funds  available  to this additional upstate credit. The Senate
  calls on the Empire  State  Development  Corporation  to  issue  the
  pending  disparity study required to enact the writers and directors
  diversity credit. The Senate also supports exploring further ways to
  increase  community  engagement  and  participation  with  projects
  receiving the Film Tax credit.
  * PART  E  --  The  Senate accepts the Executive proposal to allow the
  Department of Tax and Finance to abate penalties for underpayment of
  corporate tax prepayments due to unusual circumstances.
  * PART F -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal  to  extend  the
  application  deadline  for the COVID-19 Capital Costs Tax Credit for
  six months.
  * PART G -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to create a  new
  tax  credit for businesses that create or expand the available child
  care slots for their employees.
  * PART H -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal  to  reauthorize
  New York City to allow taxpayers to claim the Biotech Tax Credit for
  three years.
  * PART  I  -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposals to extend the
  temporary corporate franchise tax rates for three years, accepts the
  proposal to extend the historic properties rehabilitation credit for
  five years, accepts the proposal to extend the commercial production
  credit for five years, accepts the proposal to extend  the  grade  6
  fuel oil conversion credit for six months, and modifies the proposal
  to  extend  the New York City Musical Theatrical credit by expanding
  eligibility to include off-Broadway theaters.
  * PART J -- The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive  proposal  to  remove
  outdated  references  in  the  transportation  to  individuals  with
  disabilities credit, modifies the proposal to amend  the  brownfield
  credit  program  to  provide for additional flexibility for existing
  projects  taking  advantage  of  the  Brownfield  Redevelopment  Tax
  Credit,  and accepts the proposal to amend the definition of taxable
  income for the purposes of the pass-through entity tax and  allowing
  New  York  City  resident  trust and estates to elect to pay the New
  York City pass-through entity tax.
 
  * PART K -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  amend  the  definition of income for the senior citizen partial real
  property tax exemption.
  * PART  L  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to extend the
  authority to impose a fee on oil and gas companies for three years.
  * PART M -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive  proposal  to
  establish  a new process to distribute the proceeds from the sale of
  homes foreclosed  by  municipalities  for  non-payment  of  property
  taxes.
  * PART  N  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  exempt the creation of a valuation methodology for the assessment of
  wind and solar energy projects  from  being  subject  to  the  State
  Administrative Procedure Act.
  * PART  O  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  give municipalities the authority to extend their existing sales tax
  rates through  local  laws  without  needing  the  approval  of  the
  Legislature.
  * PART  P  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to remove the
  registration requirement for the congestion surcharge.
  * PART Q -- The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to require motor
  fuel distributors to remit to the State all the taxes  they  collect
  from retailers.
  * PART  R  --  The Senate accepts the Executive proposal to extend the
  sales tax exemption for goods sold from  vending  machines  for  one
  more  year  only  for  vendors who are part of a business enterprise
  program for blind vendors.
  * PART S -- The Senate accepts the Executive  proposal  to  raise  the
  excise tax on cigarettes.
  * PART  T  --  The  Senate  accepts  the  Executive proposal to impose
  additional penalties on cigarette retailers that refuse to allow  an
  inspection by the Department of Tax and Finance.
  * PART  U  -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal to
  extend preferential rates for the real estate transfer tax  and  the
  New  York  City  real  property  transfer  tax  when  properties are
  transferred to the ownership of a qualified real  estate  investment
  trusts.
  * PART V -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive's proposal to
  allow  the  Department of Tax and Finance to appeal decisions of the
  Tax Tribunal in court.
  * PART W -- The Senate accepts the Executive's proposal to change  the
  timeframe  by  which  the Department of Tax and Finance must deposit
  funds from three calendar days to three business days.
  * PART CC -- The Senate intentionally omits the Executive proposal  to
  require  corporations  to  choose  the  same  treatment  as  an
  S-corporation or a C-corporation for state and federal tax  purposes
  with the exemption of qualified manufacturers.
  * NEW  PART  DD -- The Senate advances language to fully de-couple New
  York from the Qualified Opportunity Zones program and to tax capital
  gains from investments in these zones in the same  manner  as  other
  capital gains are taxed (S.543).
  * NEW  PART  HH  -- The Senate advances language to expand the maximum
  credit for the solar energy system equipment credit from  $5,000  to
  $10,000,  to  allow  the  credit to include costs of storage systems
  installed,  to  make  the  credit  refundable  for  new  businesses
  (S.3596),  and  to  make conforming changes to the geothermal energy
  systems credit.
  * NEW PART II -- The Senate advances language to repeal the excise tax
  on medical cannabis (S.5365).
 
  * NEW PART JJ -- The Senate advances language  to  expand  the  Empire
  State  Child  Credit by allowing it to be claimed for children under
  four.
  * NEW  PART  KK -- The Senate advances language to close a loophole in
  the False Claims Act that  prohibits  actions  being  taken  against
  companies  that  knowingly  fail  to  pay  taxes  by  not filing tax
  returns.
  * NEW PART LL -- The Senate advances language to increase the personal
  income tax rates for filers making over $5 million but not over  $25
  million  from  10.3  to  10.8 percent and for filers making over $25
  million from 10.9 to 11.4 percent for Tax Years 2023 through 2027.
  * NEW PART MM -- The Senate advances language to allow individuals who
  file using an Individual Taxpayer Identification  Number  (ITIN)  to
  claim  the  state  Earned  Income  Tax  Credit  and  that  extends
  supplemental EITC payments for one year.