# Relates to grants to local governments for the reduction of paperwork

**Bill ID:** S102
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Tedisco
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S102 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S102)

## Summary

Establishes competitive paperwork reduction project grants; provides that such grants may be included for calculations of government efficiency plans.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  102
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sens. TEDISCO, SEPULVEDA -- read twice and ordered print-
  ed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Finance
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law, in relation to grants to assist local
  governments with reducing paper

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Article 7 of the executive law is amended by adding a new
 section 171 to read as follows:
  ยง 171. GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS FOR THE REDUCTION OF PAPER USE.  1.
 WITHIN  THE ANNUAL AMOUNTS APPROPRIATED THEREFOR, THE SECRETARY OF STATE
 MAY AWARD GRANTS ON A COMPETITIVE BASIS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN ORDER TO
 REDUCE PAPER USAGE AND TO IMPLEMENT DIGITAL ALTERNATIVES TO  PAPER.  THE
 SECRETARY  OF  STATE  SHALL  BY  REGULATION  ESTABLISH CRITERIA FOR SUCH
 COMPETITIVE GRANTS, WHICH SHALL AT A MINIMUM:
  (A) PROVIDE THAT THE MAXIMUM GRANT AMOUNT SHALL NOT EXCEED  TEN  THOU-
 SAND DOLLARS PER LOCAL GOVERNMENT;
  (B)  REQUIRE  LOCAL MATCHING FUNDS EQUAL TO TWENTY-FIVE PERCENT OF THE
 TOTAL AMOUNT OF SUCH GRANT; AND
  (C) ESTABLISH AN APPLICATION, EVALUATION, AND AWARD PROCESS  FOR  SUCH
 GRANT PROGRAM, WHICH SHALL BE COMPETITIVE AND PUBLICLY AVAILABLE.
  2. GRANTS AWARDED TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION MAY BE
 INCLUDED  IN  CALCULATIONS  TO  DEMONSTRATE  THREE YEAR COST SAVINGS AND
 EFFICIENCIES FOR GOVERNMENT EFFICIENCY PLANS SUBMITTED TO  THE  DIRECTOR
 OF THE BUDGET.
  3. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE TERM "LOCAL GOVERNMENT" SHALL
 HAVE  THE  SAME  MEANING  AS IN SECTION THREE-C OF THE GENERAL MUNICIPAL
 LAW.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00219-01-3