# Directs the commissioner of parks, recreation and historic preservation to establish the state parks passport program

**Bill ID:** S261
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** José M. Serrano
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S261 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S261)

## Summary

Directs the commissioner of parks, recreation and historic preservation to establish the state parks passport program allowing visitors to state parks and historic sites to log their visits to such sites in a passport book or electronic application.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  261
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SERRANO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Cultural Affairs, Tourism,
  Parks and Recreation
 
 AN ACT to amend the parks, recreation and historic preservation law,  in
  relation to establishing the state parks passport program

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The parks, recreation  and  historic  preservation  law  is
 amended by adding a new section 3.27 to read as follows:
  §  3.27  STATE  PARKS  PASSPORT  PROGRAM. 1. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER
 PROVISION OF LAW, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL ESTABLISH A STATE  PARKS  PASS-
 PORT PROGRAM.
  2.  THE STATE PARKS PASSPORT PROGRAM SHALL USE A PRINTED PASSPORT BOOK
 OR ELECTRONIC APPLICATION TO ALLOW VISITORS TO STATE PARKS AND  HISTORIC
 SITES  TO  LOG  THEIR VISITS TO SUCH SITES WITH INK STAMPS OR ELECTRONIC
 STAMPS, AND INK STAMPS OR ELECTRONIC STAMPS  THAT  IDENTIFY  EACH  STATE
 PARK OR HISTORIC SITE BY NAME. THE COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE DEVELOPMENT
 OF  THE  STATE  PARKS  PASSPORT PROGRAM SHALL BE DERIVED FROM THE PATRON
 SERVICES ACCOUNT OF THE MISCELLANEOUS SPECIAL REVENUE FUND. THE  COMMIS-
 SIONER  MAY CHARGE PURCHASERS OF THE PRINTED PASSPORT BOOK OR ELECTRONIC
 APPLICATION FOR THE COSTS ASSOCIATED FOR PRINTING  OR  DEVELOPING  THOSE
 MATERIALS.
  3.  THE COMMISSIONER MAY DESIGNATE A SUBSET OF SUCH SITES EACH YEAR TO
 HIGHLIGHT VARIOUS REGIONS OF THE STATE OR VARIOUS  STATE  PARK  REGIONS.
 THE  COMMISSIONER  MAY PROVIDE FOR THE CONDUCTING OF SPECIAL EVENTS THAT
 EMPHASIZE OUTDOOR RECREATION OR FITNESS  FOR  CERTAIN  SUBSETS  OF  PARK
 ATTENDEES INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CHILDREN AND SENIOR CITIZENS.
  4.  THE  COMMISSIONER MAY PROMULGATE SUCH REGULATIONS AS MAY BE NECES-
 SARY FOR THE OPERATION OF THE STATE PARKS PASSPORT PROGRAM.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01106-01-3