# Relates to a fare program which caps the amount of fares charged to riders during an applicable time period

**Bill ID:** S279
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew Gounardes
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S279 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S279)

## Summary

Directs the MTA to establish a fare program which caps the amount of fares charged to riders during an applicable time period at the amount which represents the value of an unlimited fare card for the same time period.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  279
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. GOUNARDES -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the public authorities law, in relation to directing the
  establishment  of  a  fare  program  which  caps the amount of fares
  charged to riders during an applicable time period
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  1266 of the public authorities law is amended by
 adding a new subdivision 20 to read as follows:
  20. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW,  THE  AUTHORITY  SHALL
 ESTABLISH  AND IMPLEMENT A FARE PROGRAM THROUGH ONE METRO NEW YORK WHICH
 LIMITS THE AMOUNT OF FARES A RIDER MAY BE CHARGED IN A  TIME  PERIOD  TO
 THE VALUE OF AN UNLIMITED PASS FOR THE SAME PERIOD OF TIME APPLICABLE TO
 ANY  SUCH  UNLIMITED  PASS.  UPON  PAYMENT OF THE FARE, A RIDER SHALL BE
 CHARGED ONLY UP TO THE APPLICABLE VALUE OF AN UNLIMITED  PASS  FOR  SUCH
 TIME  PERIOD  AND NOT MORE REGARDLESS OF HOW MANY USES THE RIDER ACCRUES
 DURING THE APPLICABLE PERIOD. ONCE  CHARGES  ACCRUE  TO  THE  APPLICABLE
 VALUE  OF  THE  UNLIMITED PASS DURING SUCH TIME PERIOD, ADDITIONAL TRIPS
 ARE FREE FOR THE REMAINDER OF THAT PERIOD.  FOR  THE  PURPOSES  OF  THIS
 SUBDIVISION,  "ONE  METRO  NEW YORK" SHALL MEAN THE DIGITAL FARE PAYMENT
 SYSTEM BEING IMPLEMENTED BY THE AUTHORITY AT  SUBWAY  AND  BUS  STATIONS
 WITHIN  THE  METROPOLITAN COMMUTER TRANSPORTATION DISTRICT AND THE STATE
 OF NEW JERSEY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the sixtieth  day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02238-01-3