# Directs the department of social services of the city of New York to provide shelter to victims of human trafficking at a residential program exclusively for victims of human trafficking

**Bill ID:** S391
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S391 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S391)

## Summary

Directs the department of social services of the city of New York, in consultation with the department of housing preservation and development, to provide shelter to victims of human trafficking at a residential program exclusively for victims of human trafficking.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  391
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Cities 1
 
 AN ACT to amend the administrative code of the  city  of  New  York,  in
  relation to directing the department of social services of the city of
  New York to provide shelter to victims of human trafficking at a resi-
  dential program exclusively for victims of human trafficking
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The administrative code of the city of New York is  amended
 by adding a new section 21-151 to read as follows:
  ยง  21-151  RESIDENTIAL  SERVICES  FOR  VICTIMS  OF  HUMAN TRAFFICKING.
 NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISION OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY, THE DEPARTMENT, IN
 CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING  PRESERVATION  AND  DEVELOP-
 MENT,  SHALL OFFER AND PROVIDE NECESSARY AND AVAILABLE EMERGENCY SHELTER
 AND SERVICES FOR UP TO NINETY DAYS AT A RESIDENTIAL PROGRAM  EXCLUSIVELY
 FOR VICTIMS OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING TO A VICTIM OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING WHETH-
 ER  OR NOT SUCH VICTIM IS ELIGIBLE FOR PUBLIC ASSISTANCE. TWO FORTY-FIVE
 DAY EXTENSIONS OF NECESSARY  AND  AVAILABLE  EMERGENCY  SHELTER  MAY  BE
 GRANTED  BEYOND  THE MAXIMUM LENGTH OF STAY AT A RESIDENTIAL PROGRAM FOR
 VICTIMS OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING FOR RESIDENTS WHO CONTINUE TO BE IN NEED OF
 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND TEMPORARY SHELTER. NOTHING IN THIS SECTION  SHALL
 BE  CONSTRUED  TO  LIMIT  ANY RIGHTS OR OBLIGATIONS PROVIDED PURSUANT TO
 FEDERAL OR STATE LAW, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO PROVIDING  REASONABLE
 ACCOMMODATIONS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02449-01-3