# Prohibits the possession and use of live ammunition at a film production facility or a qualified film production facility

**Bill ID:** S430
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin Thomas
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S430 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S430)

## Summary

Prohibits the possession and use of live ammunition at a film production facility or a qualified film production facility; requires all persons employed or present at a film production facility or a qualified film production facility to receive proper training on the safe use, handling, storage and transportation of firearms.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  430
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  THOMAS,  COMRIE,  HOYLMAN, KRUEGER, RAMOS -- read
  twice and ordered printed, and when printed to  be  committed  to  the
  Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to prohibiting the possession
  and  use  of live ammunition at a film production facility or a quali-
  fied film production facility
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Section 265.35 of the penal law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 4 to read as follows:
  4. (A) ANY PERSON WHO POSSESSES OR USES  LIVE  AMMUNITION  AT  A  FILM
 PRODUCTION  FACILITY  OR  A  QUALIFIED FILM PRODUCTION FACILITY, AS SUCH
 TERMS ARE DEFINED IN SECTION TWENTY-FOUR OF THE TAX LAW, SHALL BE GUILTY
 OF A CLASS E FELONY.
  (B) ALL PERSONS EMPLOYED OR PRESENT AT A FILM PRODUCTION FACILITY OR A
 QUALIFIED FILM PRODUCTION FACILITY, AS SUCH TERMS ARE DEFINED IN SECTION
 TWENTY-FOUR OF THE TAX LAW, SHALL RECEIVE PROPER TRAINING  ON  THE  SAFE
 USE, HANDLING, STORAGE AND TRANSPORTATION OF FIREARMS.
  (C)  THE SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE SHALL DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT A FIREARM
 SAFETY TRAINING PROGRAM THAT SHALL BE COMPLETED BY ALL PERSONS  EMPLOYED
 OR  PRESENT AT A FILM PRODUCTION FACILITY OR A QUALIFIED FILM PRODUCTION
 FACILITY, IF FIREARMS SHALL BE USED OR HANDLED AT SUCH  FACILITY,  PRIOR
 TO SUCH USE AND HANDLING.
  (D)  FOR  PURPOSES  OF  THIS SECTION THE TERM "FIREARM" SHALL INCLUDE,
 PROP GUNS, RUBBER GUNS, PLASTIC GUNS, NON-GUNS, FLINTLOCK GUNS, PISTOLS,
 MACHINE GUNS, RIFLES AND SHOTGUNS THAT  DISCHARGE  BLANK  CARTRIDGES  OR
 AMMUNITION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01898-01-3