# Requires religious dietary food options in prison commissaries and visitor's areas

**Bill ID:** S4748B
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jessica Ramos
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S4748B PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4748B)

## Summary

Requires commissaries at correctional facilities to provide food options for purchase through the commissary that satisfy the requirements of halal, kosher and other religious dietary needs of the incarcerated individuals housed at the facility; requires correctional facilities to provide food options for purchase from vending machines located in the visitor's area of the facility that satisfy the requirements of halal, kosher and other religious dietary needs of the incarcerated individuals housed at the facility; and requires that the cost of such food options be comparable to food options that are ordinarily available.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4748
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  RAMOS  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Crime Victims,  Crime  and
  Correction
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the correction law, in relation to requiring religious
  dietary food options in prison commissaries and visitor's areas

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The correction law is amended by adding a new section 134
 to read as follows:
  ยง 134. RELIGIOUS DIETARY  REQUIREMENTS.  1.  THE  COMMISSARY  AT  EACH
 CORRECTIONAL  FACILITY  SHALL  PROVIDE FOOD OPTIONS FOR PURCHASE THROUGH
 THE FACILITY COMMISSARY  THAT  SATISFY  THE  REQUIREMENTS  OF  RELIGIOUS
 DIETARY  NEEDS  OF  THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS HOUSED AT THE FACILITY,
 INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO  HALAL  FOODS  AND  KOSHER  FOODS.  FOOD
 OPTIONS  AVAILABLE  PURSUANT  TO  THIS  SUBDIVISION SHALL CONFORM TO THE
 STANDARDS TYPICALLY ASSOCIATED WITH  THE  PARTICULAR  RELIGIOUS  DIETARY
 REQUIREMENTS;  PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT IF ONE OR MORE INCARCERATED INDI-
 VIDUALS HOUSED AT THE FACILITY REQUIRES FOOD PRODUCTS THAT CONFORM TO  A
 HIGHER  RELIGIOUS  DIETARY  STANDARD,  SUCH  PRODUCTS SHALL ALSO BE MADE
 AVAILABLE THROUGH THE COMMISSARY UPON REQUEST OF THE INDIVIDUAL  REQUIR-
 ING SUCH OPTIONS.
  2.  EACH CORRECTIONAL FACILITY SHALL PROVIDE FOOD OPTIONS FOR PURCHASE
 FROM VENDING MACHINES LOCATED IN THE VISITOR'S AREA OF THE FACILITY THAT
 SATISFY THE REQUIREMENTS OF RELIGIOUS DIETARY NEEDS OF THE  INCARCERATED
 INDIVIDUALS  HOUSED AT THE FACILITY, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO HALAL
 FOODS AND KOSHER FOODS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the sixtieth  day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08752-02-3