# Authorizes special permits to remain open during certain hours of the morning

**Bill ID:** S4742AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jeremy Cooney
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S4742AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4742AA)

## Summary

Authorizes special permits to remain open during certain hours of the morning.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4742--A
  Cal. No. 488
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COONEY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Investigations and Govern-
  ment Operations -- reported favorably from said committee, ordered  to
  first  and  second  report,  ordered  to  a third reading, amended and
  ordered reprinted, retaining its place in the order of third reading
 
 AN ACT to amend the alcoholic  beverage  control  law,  in  relation  to
  authorizing special permits to remain open during certain hours of the
  morning
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 1 of  section  99  of  the  alcoholic  beverage
 control  law,  as  amended  by section 22 of part Z of chapter 85 of the
 laws of 2002, is amended to read as follows:
  1. Any person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption  on
 the  premises pursuant to this chapter may apply to the liquor authority
 for a special permit [to remain open on any week day between  the  hours
 of four o'clock a.m. or the closing hour prescribed by a rule adopted in
 a  county  on  or  before  April  first, nineteen hundred ninety-five or
 pursuant to subdivision eleven of section seventeen of this chapter, and
 eight o'clock a.m]. A PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION  SHALL  AUTHORIZE
 THE  HOLDER  OF  A RETAIL ON-PREMISES LICENSE TO SELL OR SERVE ALCOHOLIC
 BEVERAGES FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES  ON  THE  MORNING  OF  JANUARY
 FIRST  BETWEEN  FOUR  O'CLOCK  A.M.  OR SUCH OTHER HOUR THAT THE SALE OF
 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION MUST CEASE IN THE COMMU-
 NITY IN WHICH THE LICENSED PREMISES IS LOCATED, AND EIGHT  O'CLOCK  A.M.
 The fee for such permit shall be fifty-one dollars per day.
  ยง  2.  This  act  shall take effect on the sixtieth day after it shall
 have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or
 repeal of any rule or regulation necessary  for  the  implementation  of
 this  act  on its effective date are authorized to be made and completed
 on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09307-02-3