# Relates to the unlawful possession of a patient record

**Bill ID:** S4762
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew J. Lanza
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4762 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4762)

## Summary

Relates to the unlawful possession of a patient record; makes such offense a class A misdemeanor.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4762
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  LANZA  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to the unlawful possession of
  a patient record
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 250.73 to
 read as follows:
 ยง 250.73 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF A PATIENT RECORD.
  A PERSON IS GUILTY OF UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF A PATIENT RECORD WHEN THE
 PERSON OBTAINS A PATIENT RECORD WITHOUT LEGAL AUTHORITY, OR  RECEIVES  A
 PATIENT RECORD THAT WAS DISCLOSED TO HIM OR HER WITHOUT LEGAL AUTHORITY,
 AND  INTENTIONALLY DISREGARDS A WRITTEN DEMAND BY A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
 THAT LAWFULLY POSSESSED SUCH RECORD,  OR  BY  THE  PATIENT  WHO  IS  THE
 SUBJECT OF SUCH RECORD, TO RETURN OR DESTROY THE RECORD. FOR THE PURPOSE
 OF  THIS  SECTION,  "PATIENT  RECORD"  SHALL MEAN PATIENT INFORMATION AS
 DEFINED IN SECTION EIGHTEEN OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH LAW THAT IS IN  WRITTEN
 OR ELECTRONIC FORM, AND "PERSON" DOES NOT INCLUDE A COVERED ENTITY WITH-
 IN THE MEANING OF HIPAA REGULATIONS.
  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF A PATIENT RECORD IS A CLASS A MISDEMEANOR.
  ยง  2.  This  act  shall take effect on the sixtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08728-01-3