# Enacts the health care consumer and provider protection act relating to collective negotiations by health care providers with certain health care plans

**Bill ID:** S4785A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Gustavo Rivera
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4785A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4785A)

## Summary

Enacts provisions relating to collective negotiations by health care providers with certain health care plans in certain counties; applies to health benefit plans that provide benefits for medical or surgical expenses incurred as a result of a health condition, accident or sickness, including an individual, group, blanket or franchise insurance policy or insurance agreement offered by certain enumerated entities.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4785
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sens. RIVERA, COMRIE, HARCKHAM, KRUEGER, MAY -- read twice
  and ordered printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee
  on Health
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the public health law, in relation to requirements for
  collective negotiations by health care providers with  certain  health
  benefit plans

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Statement of legislative intent. The legislature finds that
 collective negotiation by competing health care providers for the  terms
 and  conditions  of contracts with health plans can result in beneficial
 results  for  health  care  consumers.  The  legislature  further  finds
 instances  where  health plans dominate the market to such a degree that
 fair and adequate negotiations between health  care  providers  and  the
 plans are adversely affected, so that it is necessary and appropriate to
 provide  for  a  system  of  collective  action on behalf of health care
 providers. Consequently, the legislature finds it appropriate and neces-
 sary to displace competition with  regulation  of  health  plan-provider
 agreements and authorize collective negotiations on the terms and condi-
 tions  of  the  relationship  between  health care plans and health care
 providers so the imbalances between the two will not result  in  adverse
 conditions  of  health  care.  This  act  is not intended to apply to or
 affect in any respect collective bargaining  relationships  which  arise
 under applicable federal or state collective bargaining statutes.
  §  2.  This  act  shall  be known and may be cited as the "health care
 consumer and provider protection act".
  § 3. Article 49 of the public health law is amended by  adding  a  new
 title III to read as follows:
  TITLE III
  COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATIONS BY HEALTH CARE
  PROVIDERS WITH HEALTH CARE PLANS

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08052-01-3
 S. 4785  2
 
 SECTION 4920. DEFINITIONS.
  4921. NON-FEE RELATED COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATION AUTHORIZED.
  4922. FEE RELATED COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATION.
  4923. COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATION REQUIREMENTS.
  4924. REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVE.
  4925. CERTAIN COLLECTIVE ACTION PROHIBITED.
  4926. FEES.
  4927. MONITORING OF AGREEMENTS.
  4928. CONFIDENTIALITY.
  4929. SEVERABILITY AND CONSTRUCTION.
  § 4920. DEFINITIONS. FOR PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE:
  1.  "HEALTH  CARE  PLAN"  MEANS  AN  ENTITY  (OTHER THAN A HEALTH CARE
 PROVIDER) THAT APPROVES, PROVIDES, ARRANGES FOR, OR PAYS FOR HEALTH CARE
 SERVICES, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO:
  (A) A HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION  LICENSED  PURSUANT  TO  ARTICLE
 FORTY-THREE  OF  THE  INSURANCE  LAW  OR  CERTIFIED  PURSUANT TO ARTICLE
 FORTY-FOUR OF THIS CHAPTER;
  (B) ANY OTHER ORGANIZATION CERTIFIED PURSUANT TO ARTICLE FORTY-FOUR OF
 THIS CHAPTER; OR
  (C) AN INSURER OR CORPORATION SUBJECT TO THE INSURANCE LAW.
  2. "PERSON" MEANS AN  INDIVIDUAL,  ASSOCIATION,  CORPORATION,  OR  ANY
 OTHER LEGAL ENTITY.
  3.  "HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVE" MEANS A THIRD PARTY WHO IS
 AUTHORIZED BY HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO NEGOTIATE ON  THEIR  BEHALF  WITH
 HEALTH  CARE PLANS OVER CONTRACTUAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS AFFECTING THOSE
 HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.
  4. "STRIKE" MEANS A WORK STOPPAGE IN PART OR IN WHOLE, DIRECT OR INDI-
 RECT, BY A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER OR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO GAIN COMPLI-
 ANCE WITH DEMANDS MADE ON A HEALTH CARE PLAN.
  5. "SUBSTANTIAL MARKET SHARE IN A BUSINESS LINE" EXISTS  IF  A  HEALTH
 CARE  PLAN'S  MARKET SHARE OF A BUSINESS LINE WITHIN THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA
 FOR WHICH A NEGOTIATION HAS BEEN APPROVED BY THE COMMISSIONER, ALONE  OR
 IN  COMBINATION WITH THE MARKET SHARES OF AFFILIATES, EXCEEDS EITHER TEN
 PERCENT OF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF COVERED LIVES IN THAT  SERVICE  AREA  FOR
 SUCH BUSINESS LINE OR TWENTY-FIVE THOUSAND LIVES, OR IF THE COMMISSIONER
 DETERMINES  THE  MARKET  SHARE  OF THE INSURER IN THE RELEVANT INSURANCE
 PRODUCT AND GEOGRAPHIC MARKETS FOR THE SERVICES OF THE PROVIDERS SEEKING
 TO  COLLECTIVELY  NEGOTIATE  SIGNIFICANTLY  EXCEEDS  THE  COUNTERVAILING
 MARKET SHARE OF THE PROVIDERS ACTING INDIVIDUALLY.
  6.  "HEALTH  CARE PROVIDER" MEANS A PERSON WHO IS LICENSED, CERTIFIED,
 REGISTERED OR AUTHORIZED PURSUANT TO TITLE EIGHT OF  THE  EDUCATION  LAW
 AND  WHO PRACTICES THAT PROFESSION AS A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER AS AN INDE-
 PENDENT CONTRACTOR AND/OR WHO IS  AN  OWNER,  OFFICER,  SHAREHOLDER,  OR
 PROPRIETOR  OF  A  HEALTH  CARE  PROVIDER,  OR AN ENTITY THAT EMPLOYS OR
 UTILIZES HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO PROVIDE HEALTH CARE SERVICES,  INCLUD-
 ING BUT NOT LIMITED TO A HOSPITAL LICENSED UNDER ARTICLE TWENTY-EIGHT OF
 THIS  CHAPTER  OR AN ACCOUNTABLE CARE ORGANIZATION UNDER ARTICLE TWENTY-
 NINE-E OF THIS CHAPTER; OR AN ENTITY AUTHORIZED UNDER  ARTICLES  THIRTY-
 SIX  OR FORTY OF THIS CHAPTER; OR A FISCAL INTERMEDIARY OPERATING PURSU-
 ANT TO SECTION THREE HUNDRED SIXTY-FIVE-F OF THE SOCIAL SERVICES LAW.  A
 HEALTH CARE PROVIDER UNDER TITLE EIGHT OF THE EDUCATION  LAW  WHO  PRAC-
 TICES  AS  AN  EMPLOYEE  OF A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER SHALL NOT BE DEEMED A
 HEALTH CARE PROVIDER FOR PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE.
  § 4921. NON-FEE RELATED COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATION AUTHORIZED.  1.  HEALTH
 CARE PROVIDERS PRACTICING WITHIN THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA FOR WHICH A NEGOTI-
 ATION HAS BEEN APPROVED BY THE COMMISSIONER MAY MEET AND COMMUNICATE FOR
 S. 4785  3
 
 THE  PURPOSE  OF COLLECTIVELY NEGOTIATING THE FOLLOWING TERMS AND CONDI-
 TIONS OF PROVIDER CONTRACTS WITH THE HEALTH CARE PLAN:
  (A)  THE DETAILS OF THE UTILIZATION REVIEW PLAN AS DEFINED PURSUANT TO
 SUBDIVISION TEN OF  SECTION  FORTY-NINE  HUNDRED  OF  THIS  ARTICLE  AND
 SUBSECTION  (J)  OF  SECTION FOUR THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED OF THE INSURANCE
 LAW;
  (B) COVERAGE  PROVISIONS;  HEALTH  CARE  BENEFITS;  BENEFIT  MAXIMUMS,
 INCLUDING BENEFIT LIMITATIONS; AND EXCLUSIONS OF COVERAGE;
  (C) THE DEFINITION OF MEDICAL NECESSITY;
  (D)  THE  CLINICAL  PRACTICE GUIDELINES USED TO MAKE MEDICAL NECESSITY
 AND UTILIZATION REVIEW DETERMINATIONS;
  (E) PREVENTIVE CARE AND OTHER MEDICAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES;
  (F) DRUG FORMULARIES AND  STANDARDS  AND  PROCEDURES  FOR  PRESCRIBING
 OFF-FORMULARY DRUGS;
  (G) RESPECTIVE PHYSICIAN LIABILITY FOR THE TREATMENT OR LACK OF TREAT-
 MENT OF COVERED PERSONS;
  (H)  THE  DETAILS  OF HEALTH CARE PLAN RISK TRANSFER ARRANGEMENTS WITH
 PROVIDERS;
  (I) PLAN ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES, INCLUDING METHODS  AND  TIMING  OF
 HEALTH CARE PROVIDER PAYMENT FOR SERVICES;
  (J)  PROCEDURES  TO BE UTILIZED TO RESOLVE DISPUTES BETWEEN THE HEALTH
 CARE PLAN AND HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS;
  (K) PATIENT REFERRAL PROCEDURES INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED  TO,  THOSE
 APPLICABLE TO OUT-OF-NETWORK REFERRALS;
  (L) THE FORMULATION AND APPLICATION OF HEALTH CARE PROVIDER REIMBURSE-
 MENT PROCEDURES;
  (M) QUALITY ASSURANCE PROGRAMS;
  (N)  THE  PROCESS  FOR  RENDERING  UTILIZATION  REVIEW  DETERMINATIONS
 INCLUDING: ESTABLISHMENT OF A PROCESS FOR RENDERING  UTILIZATION  REVIEW
 DETERMINATIONS WHICH SHALL, AT A MINIMUM, INCLUDE: WRITTEN PROCEDURES TO
 ASSURE  THAT UTILIZATION REVIEWS AND DETERMINATIONS ARE CONDUCTED WITHIN
 THE TIMEFRAMES ESTABLISHED IN THIS  ARTICLE;  PROCEDURES  TO  NOTIFY  AN
 ENROLLEE,  AN  ENROLLEE'S  DESIGNEE  AND/OR  AN  ENROLLEE'S  HEALTH CARE
 PROVIDER OF ADVERSE DETERMINATIONS; AND PROCEDURES FOR APPEAL OF ADVERSE
 DETERMINATIONS, INCLUDING THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  AN  EXPEDITED  APPEALS
 PROCESS  FOR DENIALS OF CONTINUED INPATIENT CARE OR WHERE THERE IS IMMI-
 NENT OR SERIOUS THREAT TO THE HEALTH OF THE ENROLLEE; AND
  (O) HEALTH CARE PROVIDER SELECTION AND TERMINATION  CRITERIA  USED  BY
 THE HEALTH CARE PLAN.
  2. NOTHING IN THIS SECTION SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO ALLOW OR AUTHORIZE AN
 ALTERATION  OF  THE TERMS OF THE INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURES
 SET FORTH IN LAW.
  3. NOTHING IN THIS SECTION SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO ALLOW A STRIKE  OF  A
 HEALTH  CARE  PLAN  BY  HEALTH  CARE PROVIDERS OR PLANS AS OTHERWISE SET
 FORTH IN THE LAWS OF THIS STATE.
  4. NOTHING IN THIS SECTION SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO  ALLOW  OR  AUTHORIZE
 TERMS OR CONDITIONS WHICH WOULD IMPEDE THE ABILITY OF A HEALTH CARE PLAN
 TO  OBTAIN OR RETAIN ACCREDITATION BY THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR QUALITY
 ASSURANCE OR A SIMILAR BODY.
  § 4922. FEE RELATED COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATION. 1. IF THE HEALTH CARE PLAN
 HAS SUBSTANTIAL MARKET SHARE IN A BUSINESS LINE IN ANY  GEOGRAPHIC  AREA
 FOR  WHICH  A  NEGOTIATION HAS BEEN APPROVED BY THE COMMISSIONER, HEALTH
 CARE PROVIDERS PRACTICING WITHIN THAT GEOGRAPHIC AREA  MAY  COLLECTIVELY
 NEGOTIATE  THE  FOLLOWING TERMS AND CONDITIONS RELATING TO THAT BUSINESS
 LINE WITH THE HEALTH CARE PLAN:
 S. 4785  4
 
  (A) THE FEES ASSESSED BY THE HEALTH CARE PLAN FOR SERVICES,  INCLUDING
 FEES ESTABLISHED THROUGH THE APPLICATION OF REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURES;
  (B)  THE  CONVERSION  FACTORS  USED  BY  THE  HEALTH  CARE  PLAN  IN A
 RESOURCE-BASED RELATIVE VALUE SCALE REIMBURSEMENT METHODOLOGY  OR  OTHER
 SIMILAR  METHODOLOGY; PROVIDED THE SAME ARE NOT OTHERWISE ESTABLISHED BY
 STATE OR FEDERAL LAW OR REGULATION;
  (C) THE AMOUNT OF ANY DISCOUNT GRANTED BY THE HEALTH CARE PLAN ON  THE
 FEE OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES TO BE RENDERED BY HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS;
  (D)  THE  DOLLAR  AMOUNT  OF  CAPITATION  OR  FIXED PAYMENT FOR HEALTH
 SERVICES RENDERED BY HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO HEALTH  CARE  PLAN  ENROL-
 LEES;
  (E)  THE  PROCEDURE CODE OR OTHER DESCRIPTION OF A HEALTH CARE SERVICE
 COVERED BY A PAYMENT AND  THE  APPROPRIATE  GROUPING  OF  THE  PROCEDURE
 CODES; OR
  (F) THE AMOUNT OF ANY OTHER COMPONENT OF THE REIMBURSEMENT METHODOLOGY
 FOR A HEALTH CARE SERVICE.
  2.  NOTHING  HEREIN  SHALL BE DEEMED TO AFFECT OR LIMIT THE RIGHT OF A
 HEALTH CARE PROVIDER OR GROUP OF HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS  TO  COLLECTIVELY
 PETITION A GOVERNMENT ENTITY FOR A CHANGE IN A LAW, RULE, OR REGULATION.
  § 4923. COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATION REQUIREMENTS. 1. COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATION
 RIGHTS GRANTED BY THIS TITLE MUST CONFORM TO THE FOLLOWING REQUIREMENTS:
  (A)  HEALTH  CARE  PROVIDERS  MAY  COMMUNICATE  WITH OTHER HEALTH CARE
 PROVIDERS REGARDING THE CONTRACTUAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS TO  BE  NEGOTI-
 ATED WITH A HEALTH CARE PLAN;
  (B)  HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS MAY COMMUNICATE WITH HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS'
 REPRESENTATIVES;
  (C) A HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVE IS THE ONLY PARTY  AUTHOR-
 IZED  TO  NEGOTIATE  WITH HEALTH CARE PLANS ON BEHALF OF THE HEALTH CARE
 PROVIDERS AS A GROUP;
  (D) A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER CAN BE BOUND BY THE  TERMS  AND  CONDITIONS
 NEGOTIATED BY THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVES; AND
  (E)  IN  COMMUNICATING  OR NEGOTIATING WITH THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS'
 REPRESENTATIVE, A HEALTH CARE PLAN IS ENTITLED TO CONTRACT WITH OR OFFER
 DIFFERENT CONTRACT TERMS AND CONDITIONS TO INDIVIDUAL  COMPETING  HEALTH
 CARE PROVIDERS.
  2. A HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVE MAY NOT REPRESENT MORE THAN
 THIRTY PERCENT OF THE MARKET OF HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS OR OF A PARTICULAR
 HEALTH CARE PROVIDER TYPE OR SPECIALTY PRACTICING IN THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA
 FOR  WHICH  A  NEGOTIATION  HAS BEEN APPROVED BY THE COMMISSIONER IF THE
 HEALTH CARE PLAN COVERS LESS THAN FIVE PERCENT OF THE ACTUAL  NUMBER  OF
 COVERED  LIVES OF THE HEALTH CARE PLAN IN THE AREA, AS DETERMINED BY THE
 DEPARTMENT.
  3. NOTHING IN THIS SECTION SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO  PROHIBIT  COLLECTIVE
 ACTION  ON  THE  PART  OF  ANY HEALTH CARE PROVIDER WHO IS A MEMBER OF A
 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING UNIT RECOGNIZED PURSUANT  TO  THE  NATIONAL  LABOR
 RELATIONS ACT.
  §  4924.  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVE. 1.
 BEFORE ENGAGING IN COLLECTIVE NEGOTIATIONS WITH A HEALTH  CARE  PLAN  ON
 BEHALF OF HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, A HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVE
 SHALL  FILE  WITH  THE  COMMISSIONER,  IN  THE  MANNER PRESCRIBED BY THE
 COMMISSIONER, INFORMATION IDENTIFYING THE REPRESENTATIVE, THE  REPRESEN-
 TATIVE'S  PLAN  OF  OPERATION,  AND  THE  REPRESENTATIVE'S PROCEDURES TO
 ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS TITLE.
  2. BEFORE ENGAGING IN THE COLLECTIVE  NEGOTIATIONS,  THE  HEALTH  CARE
 PROVIDERS'  REPRESENTATIVE SHALL ALSO SUBMIT TO THE COMMISSIONER FOR THE
 COMMISSIONER'S APPROVAL A REPORT IDENTIFYING THE PROPOSED SUBJECT MATTER
 S. 4785  5
 
 OF THE NEGOTIATIONS OR DISCUSSIONS WITH THE HEALTH  CARE  PLAN  AND  THE
 EFFICIENCIES  OR  BENEFITS  EXPECTED  TO BE ACHIEVED THROUGH THE NEGOTI-
 ATIONS FOR BOTH THE PROVIDERS AND  CONSUMERS  OF  HEALTH  SERVICES.  THE
 COMMISSIONER  SHALL  NOT  APPROVE  THE  REPORT  IF  THE COMMISSIONER, IN
 CONSULTATION WITH THE SUPERINTENDENT OF  FINANCIAL  SERVICES  DETERMINES
 THAT  THE PROPOSED NEGOTIATIONS WOULD EXCEED THE AUTHORITY GRANTED UNDER
 THIS TITLE.
  3. THE REPRESENTATIVE SHALL SUPPLEMENT THE INFORMATION IN  THE  REPORT
 ON  A  REGULAR BASIS OR AS NEW INFORMATION BECOMES AVAILABLE, INDICATING
 THAT THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THE NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE  HEALTH  CARE  PLAN
 HAS  CHANGED  OR  WILL CHANGE. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REPORT BE LESS THAN
 EVERY THIRTY DAYS.
  4. WITH THE ADVICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES AND THE
 ATTORNEY GENERAL, THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL  APPROVE  OR  DISAPPROVE  THE
 REPORT  NOT  LATER  THAN  THE  TWENTIETH DAY AFTER THE DATE ON WHICH THE
 REPORT IS FILED. IF DISAPPROVED, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL FURNISH A  WRIT-
 TEN  EXPLANATION OF ANY DEFICIENCIES, ALONG WITH A STATEMENT OF SPECIFIC
 PROPOSALS FOR REMEDIAL MEASURES TO CURE THE DEFICIENCIES. IF THE COMMIS-
 SIONER DOES NOT SO ACT WITHIN THE  TWENTY  DAYS,  THE  REPORT  SHALL  BE
 DEEMED APPROVED.
  5.  A PERSON WHO ACTS AS A HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVE WITH-
 OUT THE APPROVAL OF THE COMMISSIONER UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE  DEEMED
 TO BE ACTING OUTSIDE THE AUTHORITY GRANTED UNDER THIS TITLE.
  6.  BEFORE  REPORTING  THE  RESULTS OF NEGOTIATIONS WITH A HEALTH CARE
 PLAN OR PROVIDING TO THE AFFECTED HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AN EVALUATION OF
 ANY OFFER MADE BY A HEALTH CARE PLAN, THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS'  REPRE-
 SENTATIVE SHALL FURNISH FOR APPROVAL BY THE COMMISSIONER, BEFORE DISSEM-
 INATION TO THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, A COPY OF ALL COMMUNICATIONS TO BE
 MADE  TO THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS RELATED TO NEGOTIATIONS, DISCUSSIONS,
 AND OFFERS MADE BY THE HEALTH CARE PLAN.
  7. A HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVE  SHALL REPORT THE  END  OF
 NEGOTIATIONS TO THE COMMISSIONER NOT LATER THAN THE FOURTEENTH DAY AFTER
 THE DATE OF A HEALTH CARE PLAN DECISION DECLINING NEGOTIATION, CANCELING
 NEGOTIATIONS,  OR  FAILING  TO RESPOND TO A REQUEST FOR NEGOTIATION.  IN
 SUCH INSTANCES, A HEALTH  CARE  PROVIDERS'  REPRESENTATIVE  MAY  REQUEST
 INTERVENTION  FROM  THE  COMMISSIONER TO REQUIRE THE HEALTH CARE PLAN TO
 PARTICIPATE IN THE NEGOTIATION PURSUANT TO  SUBDIVISION  EIGHT  OF  THIS
 SECTION.
  8. (A) IN THE EVENT THE COMMISSIONER DETERMINES THAT AN IMPASSE EXISTS
 IN  THE  NEGOTIATIONS,  OR  IN  THE EVENT A HEALTH CARE PLAN DECLINES TO
 NEGOTIATE, CANCELS NEGOTIATIONS OR FAILS TO RESPOND  TO  A  REQUEST  FOR
 NEGOTIATION, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL RENDER ASSISTANCE AS FOLLOWS:
  (1)  TO  ASSIST  THE  PARTIES  TO EFFECT A VOLUNTARY RESOLUTION OF THE
 NEGOTIATIONS, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL APPOINT A MEDIATOR FROM A  LIST  OF
 QUALIFIED  PERSONS  MAINTAINED  BY  THE COMMISSIONER. IF THE MEDIATOR IS
 SUCCESSFUL IN RESOLVING THE IMPASSE, THEN  THE  HEALTH  CARE  PROVIDERS'
 REPRESENTATIVE SHALL PROCEED AS SET FORTH IN THIS ARTICLE;
  (2)  IF  AN  IMPASSE CONTINUES, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL APPOINT A FACT-
 FINDING BOARD OF NOT MORE THAN THREE MEMBERS FROM A  LIST  OF  QUALIFIED
 PERSONS  MAINTAINED  BY THE COMMISSIONER, WHICH FACT-FINDING BOARD SHALL
 HAVE, IN ADDITION TO THE POWERS DELEGATED TO IT BY THE BOARD, THE  POWER
 TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE RESOLUTION OF THE DISPUTE;
  (B) THE FACT-FINDING BOARD, ACTING BY A MAJORITY OF ITS MEMBERS, SHALL
 TRANSMIT  ITS FINDINGS OF FACT AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RESOLUTION OF THE
 DISPUTE TO THE COMMISSIONER, AND MAY THEREAFTER ASSIST  THE  PARTIES  TO
 EFFECT  A  VOLUNTARY  RESOLUTION  OF THE DISPUTE. THE FACT-FINDING BOARD
 S. 4785  6
 
 SHALL ALSO SHARE ITS FINDINGS  OF  FACT  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS  WITH  THE
 HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVE AND THE HEALTH CARE PLAN. IF WITH-
 IN  TWENTY  DAYS AFTER THE SUBMISSION OF THE FINDINGS OF FACT AND RECOM-
 MENDATIONS, THE IMPASSE CONTINUES, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL ORDER A RESOL-
 UTION  TO  THE  NEGOTIATIONS  BASED  UPON  THE  FINDINGS  OF  FACT  AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS SUBMITTED BY THE FACT-FINDING BOARD.
  9. ANY PROPOSED AGREEMENT BETWEEN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND  A  HEALTH
 CARE  PLAN  NEGOTIATED  PURSUANT TO THIS TITLE SHALL BE SUBMITTED TO THE
 COMMISSIONER FOR FINAL  APPROVAL.  THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL  APPROVE  OR
 DISAPPROVE THE AGREEMENT WITHIN SIXTY DAYS OF SUCH SUBMISSION.
  10.  THE  COMMISSIONER  MAY  COLLECT INFORMATION FROM OTHER PERSONS TO
 ASSIST IN EVALUATING THE IMPACT  OF  THE  PROPOSED  ARRANGEMENT  ON  THE
 HEALTH CARE MARKETPLACE. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL COLLECT INFORMATION FROM
 HEALTH  PLAN  COMPANIES  AND HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS OPERATING IN THE SAME
 GEOGRAPHIC AREA.
  § 4925. CERTAIN COLLECTIVE ACTION PROHIBITED. 1.  THIS  TITLE  IS  NOT
 INTENDED  TO AUTHORIZE COMPETING HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO ACT IN CONCERT
 IN RESPONSE TO A REPORT ISSUED BY THE HEALTH CARE  PROVIDERS'  REPRESEN-
 TATIVE  RELATED TO THE REPRESENTATIVE'S DISCUSSIONS OR NEGOTIATIONS WITH
 HEALTH CARE PLANS.
  2. NO HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS' REPRESENTATIVE SHALL NEGOTIATE ANY AGREE-
 MENT THAT EXCLUDES, LIMITS THE PARTICIPATION  OR  REIMBURSEMENT  OF,  OR
 OTHERWISE LIMITS THE SCOPE OF SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED BY ANY HEALTH CARE
 PROVIDER  OR GROUP OF HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS WITH RESPECT TO THE PERFORM-
 ANCE OF SERVICES THAT ARE WITHIN THE HEALTH  CARE  PROVIDER'S  SCOPE  OF
 PRACTICE, LICENSE, REGISTRATION, OR CERTIFICATE.
  §  4926. FEES. EACH PERSON WHO ACTS AS THE REPRESENTATIVE OR NEGOTIAT-
 ING PARTIES UNDER THIS TITLE SHALL PAY TO THE DEPARTMENT A FEE TO ACT AS
 A REPRESENTATIVE. THE COMMISSIONER, BY RULE, SHALL SET FEES  IN  AMOUNTS
 DEEMED  REASONABLE  AND  NECESSARY  TO  COVER  THE COSTS INCURRED BY THE
 DEPARTMENT IN ADMINISTERING THIS TITLE. ANY  FEE  COLLECTED  UNDER  THIS
 SECTION  SHALL  BE  DEPOSITED IN THE STATE TREASURY TO THE CREDIT OF THE
 GENERAL FUND/STATE OPERATIONS - 003 FOR THE NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF
 HEALTH FUND.
  § 4927. MONITORING OF  AGREEMENTS.  THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL  ACTIVELY
 MONITOR  AGREEMENTS  APPROVED UNDER THIS TITLE TO ENSURE THAT THE AGREE-
 MENT REMAINS  IN  COMPLIANCE  WITH  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  APPROVAL.  UPON
 REQUEST, A HEALTH CARE PLAN OR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER SHALL PROVIDE INFOR-
 MATION  REGARDING  COMPLIANCE.  THE  COMMISSIONER MAY REVOKE AN APPROVAL
 UPON A FINDING THAT THE AGREEMENT IS NOT IN SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE  WITH
 THE TERMS OF THE APPLICATION OR THE CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
  § 4928. CONFIDENTIALITY. ALL REPORTS AND OTHER INFORMATION REQUIRED TO
 BE REPORTED TO THE DEPARTMENT OF LAW UNDER THIS TITLE INCLUDING INFORMA-
 TION OBTAINED BY THE COMMISSIONER PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION TEN OF SECTION
 FORTY-NINE  HUNDRED  TWENTY-FOUR  OF  THIS TITLE SHALL NOT BE SUBJECT TO
 DISCLOSURE UNDER ARTICLE SIX OF THE PUBLIC OFFICERS LAW OR ARTICLE THIR-
 TY-ONE OF THE CIVIL PRACTICE LAW AND RULES.
  § 4929. SEVERABILITY AND CONSTRUCTION. THE PROVISIONS  OF  THIS  TITLE
 SHALL  BE SEVERABLE, AND IF ANY COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION DECLARES
 ANY PHRASE, CLAUSE, SENTENCE OR PROVISION OF THIS TITLE TO  BE  INVALID,
 OR  ITS  APPLICABILITY TO ANY GOVERNMENT, AGENCY, PERSON OR CIRCUMSTANCE
 IS DECLARED INVALID, THE REMAINDER OF THIS TITLE AND ITS RELEVANT APPLI-
 CABILITY SHALL NOT BE AFFECTED. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS  TITLE  SHALL  BE
 LIBERALLY CONSTRUED TO GIVE EFFECT TO THE PURPOSES THEREOF.
  § 4. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it  shall have become a law; provided that the commissioner of health is
 S. 4785  7
 
 authorized to promulgate any and all rules and regulations and take  any
 other  measures necessary to implement this act on its effective date on
 or before such date.