# Requires at least one member of the state board of parole be a formerly incarcerated person

**Bill ID:** S4795
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4795 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4795)

## Summary

Relates to requiring at least one member of the state board of parole be a formerly incarcerated person.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4795
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Crime Victims,  Crime  and
  Correction
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law, in relation to requiring at least one
  member of the state board of parole be a formerly incarcerated person

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 1 of section 259-b of  the  executive  law,  as
 amended by section 38-a of subpart A of part C of chapter 62 of the laws
 of 2011, is amended to read as follows:
  1.  There  shall  be  in  the department a state board of parole which
 shall possess the powers and duties  hereinafter  specified.  The  board
 shall  function  independently  of  the  department regarding all of its
 decision-making functions, as well as any other powers and duties speci-
 fied in this article, provided, however, that administrative matters  of
 general  applicability  within the department shall be applicable to the
 board. Such board shall  consist  of  not  more  than  nineteen  members
 appointed  by the governor with the advice and consent of the senate. AT
 LEAST ONE MEMBER OF THE BOARD SHALL BE A FORMERLY  INCARCERATED  PERSON.
 The  term of office of each member of such board shall be for six years;
 provided, however, that any member chosen to fill  a  vacancy  occurring
 otherwise  than by expiration of term shall be appointed for the remain-
 der of the unexpired term of the member whom he is to  succeed.  In  the
 event  of  the  inability to act of any member, the governor may appoint
 some competent informed person to act in his stead  during  the  contin-
 uance of such disability.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09561-01-3