# Relates to a disclosure form for the surrender of a dog to a shelter, pound or dog protective association

**Bill ID:** S4800
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Anthony H. Palumbo
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4800 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4800)

## Summary

Requires a disclosure form for the surrender of a dog to a shelter, pound or dog protective association detailing the reasons for surrender and any aggressive tendencies of such dog.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4800
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 14, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. PALUMBO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Agriculture
 
 AN ACT to amend the agriculture  and  markets  law,  in  relation  to  a
  disclosure form for the surrender of a dog
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 117 of the agriculture and markets law  is  amended
 by adding a new subdivision 12 to read as follows:
  12.  (A)  EVERY POUND, SHELTER, INCORPORATED HUMANE SOCIETY OR SIMILAR
 INCORPORATED DOG PROTECTIVE ASSOCIATION, SHALL DEVELOP A FORM TO BE USED
 UPON THE SURRENDER OF A DOG BY ITS OWNER TO SUCH ENTITY. SUCH FORM SHALL
 REQUEST THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION FROM SUCH OWNER:
  (I) THE REASON OR REASONS FOR SURRENDERING THE DOG;
  (II) WHETHER THE DOG HAS BEEN DECLARED TO BE A DANGEROUS DOG;  WHETHER
 SUCH DOG HAS EVER EXHIBITED AGGRESSIVE TENDENCIES;
  (III) WHETHER THE DOG HAS EVER BITTEN ANY PERSON; AND
  (IV)  ANY  OTHER  INFORMATION  WITH  REGARD TO THE DOG WHICH THE OWNER
 FEELS MAY BE RELEVANT TO THE FUTURE PLACEMENT OF THE DOG.
  (B) THE POUND, SHELTER, INCORPORATED HUMANE SOCIETY OR SIMILAR  INCOR-
 PORATED DOG PROTECTIVE ASSOCIATION WHICH ACCEPTS DOGS SURRENDERED BY ITS
 OWNER  TO BE SHELTERED AND ADOPTED OUT SHALL MAINTAIN THE FORM AND SHALL
 DISCLOSE IT TO ANY PROSPECTIVE ADOPTIVE OWNER OR ANY  OTHER  PERSON  WHO
 MAY  SHELTER  OR HARBOR THE DOG FOR ANY PERIOD OF TIME AFTER ITS SURREN-
 DER.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the sixtieth  day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07168-01-3