# Relates to the definition of an indoor area; and to repealing certain provisions of the public health law relating thereto

**Bill ID:** S4816
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Joseph P. Addabbo Jr.
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4816 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4816)

## Summary

Relates to the definition of an indoor area.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4816
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 15, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ADDABBO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to the definition  of
  an  indoor area; and to repeal certain provisions of such law relating
  thereto

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  1399-n  of  the  public health law is amended by
 adding a new subdivision 12 to read as follows:
  12. "INDOOR AREA" MEANS ANY AREA WITH A FULL OR PARTIAL ROOF COVERING,
 INCLUDING AN AREA WITH A ROOF OR CEILING IN PLACE, WHICH MAY BE A  FIXED
 OR  MOVABLE  ROOF  OR  CEILING,  WHERE THE TOTAL ACTUAL AREA OF THE WALL
 SURFACES EXCEEDS SEVENTY-FIVE PERCENT OF THE TOTAL NOTIONAL  WALL  AREA,
 AND  WHICH  ALLOW THE FREE FLOW OF AIR WITHOUT THE ASSISTANCE OF MECHAN-
 ICAL VENTILATION, AS DEFINED BY THE COMMISSIONER. THE  COMMISSIONER  MAY
 DETERMINE AND ENFORCE A LOWER PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL ACTUAL AREA TO NOTION-
 AL  WALL  AREA, AS DEEMED NECESSARY TO PROTECT THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND THE
 INTENT OF THIS ARTICLE, PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT THE  MAXIMUM  PERCENTAGE
 DETERMINED  IS  NOT  LOWER THAN FIFTY PERCENT OF THE TOTAL NOTIONAL WALL
 AREA. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL PROMULGATE SUCH RULES  AND  REGULATIONS  AS
 ARE  NECESSARY TO DEFINE NOTIONAL WALL AREA, MECHANICAL VENTILATION, AND
 RELATED BUILDING SPECIFICATIONS NEEDED TO DETERMINE WHETHER A  STRUCTURE
 FALLS WITHIN THE DEFINITION OF INDOOR AREA.
  ยง 2. Section 1399-x of the public health law is REPEALED.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01289-01-3