# Authorizes the combination of certain petit larceny charges

**Bill ID:** S4857AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Ortt
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4857AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4857AA)

## Summary

Provides that a person who has previously been subjected to two or more petit larceny convictions within 18 months immediately preceding the charge shall be guilty of grand larceny in the fourth degree.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4857--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 15, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  ORTT  --  read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be  committed  to  the  Committee  on  Codes  --  committee
  discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted
  to said committee
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the penal law, in relation to allowing prosecutors to
  combine certain charges

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Subdivisions  9, 10 and 11 of section 155.30 of the penal
 law, subdivision 9 as amended by chapter 479 of the laws of 2010, subdi-
 vision 10 as added by chapter 491 of the laws of 1992 and subdivision 11
 as added by chapter 394 of the laws of  2005,  are  amended  and  a  new
 subdivision 12 is added to read as follows:
  9. The property consists of a scroll, religious vestment, a vessel, an
 item  comprising  a display of religious symbols which forms a represen-
 tative expression of faith, or  other  miscellaneous  item  of  property
 which:
  (a) has a value of at least one hundred dollars; and
  (b)  is  kept  for or used in connection with religious worship in any
 building, structure or upon the curtilage of such building or  structure
 used  as  a  place  of  religious worship by a religious corporation, as
 incorporated under the  religious  corporations  law  or  the  education
 law[.]; OR
  10. The property consists of an access device which the person intends
 to use unlawfully to obtain telephone service[.]; OR
  11.  The  property  consists of anhydrous ammonia or liquified ammonia
 gas and the actor intends to use, or knows  another  person  intends  to
 use,  such  anhydrous  ammonia  or  liquified ammonia gas to manufacture
 methamphetamine[.]; OR
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07337-02-3
 S. 4857--A  2
 
  12. SUCH PERSON HAS PREVIOUSLY BEEN SUBJECTED TO  TWO  OR  MORE  PETIT
 LARCENY  CONVICTIONS AS DEFINED IN SECTION 155.25 OF THIS ARTICLE WITHIN
 THE EIGHTEEN MONTHS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE CHARGE UNDER THIS SECTION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the first of November next succeed-
 ing the date on which it shall have become a law.