# Enacts the New York tropical deforestation-free procurement act and establishes the supply chain transparency assistance program

**Bill ID:** S4859A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Liz Krueger
**Status:** Vetoed
**PDF:** [S4859A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4859A)

## Summary

Enacts the New York tropical deforestation-free procurement act requiring that companies contracting with the state do not contribute to tropical primary forest degradation or deforestation directly or through their supply chains; establishes the supply chain transparency assistance program to assist small and medium-sized businesses and minority- and women-owned businesses in achieving compliant supply chains.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4859
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  KRUEGER,  COONEY, MAY, BRESLIN, BRISPORT, CLEARE,
  COMRIE, HARCKHAM, HINCHEY, HOYLMAN-SIGAL, JACKSON, SALAZAR, SEPULVEDA,
  SKOUFIS, STAVISKY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when  printed
  to be committed to the Committee on Procurement and Contracts
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the state finance law, in relation to enacting the New
  York tropical deforestation-free procurement act;  and  to  amend  the
  economic development law, in relation to establishing the supply chain
  transparency assistance program
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. This act shall be known and may be cited as the  "New  York
 tropical deforestation-free procurement act".
  §  2.  Legislative  findings.  The  legislature finds and declares the
 following:
  1. Tropical forests cover roughly 7 percent of  Earth's  surface,  but
 harbor close to 50 percent of all species on Earth.
  2.  Human  activity  is  the  driving force behind the current rate of
 species extinction, which is at least 100 to  1,000  times  higher  than
 historical  levels.  The  Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on
 Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services  reported  in  2019  that  around  1
 million  animal  and  plant  species are now threatened with extinction,
 many within decades, more than ever before in  human  history.  This  is
 directly  linked  to habitat loss, with more than a third of the world's
 land surface and nearly 75 percent of freshwater resources  now  devoted
 to crop or livestock production.
  3.  Globally,  an  estimated  18,000,000 acres of forest, an area more
 than half the size of New York state, are lost every year to  deforesta-
 tion  according  to  the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
 Nations, with over one-half of Earth's tropical forests already gone. At
 the current pace, the entirety of Earth's tropical rainforests  will  be
 degraded or destroyed within the next 100 years.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07504-03-3
 S. 4859  2
 
  4.  It  has  been  estimated  that  at least 30 percent of the world's
 greenhouse gas emissions come from deforestation and forest degradation.
 Taking into account carbon sequestration potential, stopping the loss of
 tropical forests, mangroves, and wetlands could provide over 20  percent
 of climate mitigation by 2030.
  5. Loss of biodiversity resulting from forest degradation and defores-
 tation,  as  well  as human encroachment on formerly undisturbed ecosys-
 tems, increases the risks of zoonotic disease pandemics such  as  COVID-
 19.
  6. New York state is a leader in addressing the climate crisis, with a
 statutory  goal  of achieving net-zero greenhouse gas emissions economy-
 wide by 2050.
  7. Tropical deforestation in many countries is closely associated with
 violations of the land rights of indigenous peoples and  local  communi-
 ties  and  with  the exploitation of workers, including forced labor and
 child labor, and in many cases is enabled  by  corruption,  criminality,
 and violence against conservationists and land defenders.
  8. Tropical deforestation in many countries is also closely associated
 with  illegal wildlife trafficking, including, but not limited to, vari-
 ous bird and reptile species,  many  primate  species,  including  great
 apes, pangolins, and orangutans.
  9.  The primary factors leading to tropical deforestation are degrada-
 tion and road-building associated with logging for timber,  which  opens
 the  door  for  deforestation  caused  by industrial-scale production of
 agricultural commodities and conversion of forests into plantations  for
 the  timber, pulp, paper, palm oil, soy, and livestock industries, among
 others. Together, these are increasingly known as  "forest-risk  commod-
 ities".
  10.  New York is inadvertently promoting and sanctioning deforestation
 and  primary  forest  degradation  through  the  purchase  of  goods and
 products that have been produced in supply  chains  that  contribute  to
 tropical deforestation and tropical primary forest degradation.
  11.  New  York  has  one of the largest economies in the world and its
 purchasing power has significant market force, allowing  it  to  play  a
 leadership  role  in  preventing  forest loss and supporting markets for
 sustainably-sourced products.
  12. It is the intent of the legislature that it be the policy of  this
 state  to ensure companies contracting with the state are not contribut-
 ing to tropical deforestation or  tropical  primary  forest  degradation
 directly or through their supply chains.
  §  3.  Paragraphs b, c, d and e of subdivision 1 of section 165 of the
 state finance law, as added by chapter 83  of  the  laws  of  1995,  are
 amended to read as follows:
  b. "Tropical hardwood" shall mean any and all hardwood, scientifically
 classified  as  angiosperm,  that  grows in any tropical [moist] forest.
 Tropical hardwoods shall [be] INCLUDE BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO the  follow-
 ing species:
  Scientific Name  EXAMPLES OF Common [Name]
  NAMES
  PRUNUS AFRICANA  AFRICAN CHERRY, RED STINKWOOD
  CARYOCAR COSTARICENSE  AJO, AJI
  CALOPHYLLUM SPP.  BINTANGOR
  CEDRELA SPP.  CEDAR
  NEOBALANOCARPUS HEIMII,  CHENGAL
  BALANOCARPUS HEIMII
  OCTOMELES SUMATRANA MIQ.  ERIMA, BENUANG
 S. 4859  3
 
  MYROXYLON BALSAMUM  ESTORAQUE
  APULEIA LEIOCARPA  GARAPA
  PARASTEMON UROPHYLLUS, PARASTEMON  MALAS
  SPICATUS RIDLEY
  HOPEA SPP.  MERAWAN
  ARAUCARIA ARAUCANA  MONKEY PUZZLE, CHILEAN PINE
  PTEROCARPUS TINCTORIUS  MUKULA
  SENNA SIAMEA  SIAMESE SENNA
  POMETIA PINATA  TAUN
  MILLETIA LEUCANTHA KURZ  THINWIN
  BULNESIA ARBOREA, BULNESIA  VERAWOOD, ARGENTINE LIGNUM
  SARMIENTOI  VITAE
  TRISTANIOPSIS LAURINA  WATER GUM
  TERMINALIA SPP.
  HOMALIUM FOETIDUM  MALAS
  DILLENIA PAPUANA  DILLENIA
  CANARIUM SPP.  RED CANARIUM, GREY CANARIUM
  BURKRELLA MACROPODA  RANG RANG
  OCTOMELES SUMATRANA  ERIMA, BENUANG
  DRACONTOMELON DAO  NEW GUINEA WALNUT
  PLANCHONELLA SPP.  WHITE PLANCHONELLA, RED
  PLANCHONELLA
  LOPHOPETALUM SPP.  PERUPOK
  CARINIAN PYRIFORMIS  ABARCO, JEQUITIBA
  MITRAGYNA CILIATE  ABURA
  Vouacapous americana  Acapu
  AMBURANA CAERENSIS  AMBURANA, CEREJEIRA
  DALBERGIA MELANOXYLON  AFRICAN BLACKWOOD
  LOVOA SPP.  AFRICAN WALNUT, TIGERWOOD
  Pericopsis elata  [Afrormosis] AFRORMOSIA
  [Shorea almon]  [Almon]
  ASPIDOSPERMA MEGALOCARPON  ACARETTO
  Peltogyne spp.  Amaranth, PURPLEHEART
  TERMINALIA AMAZONIA  AMARILLO REAL
  [Guibourtis] Guibourtia ehie  Amazaque
  AMBURANA CEARENSIS  AMBURANA, CEREJEIRA, CUMARE
  PTEROGYNE NITENS  AMENDOIM
  CARAPA GUIANENSIS  ANDIROBA, FALSE MAHOGANY
  DICORYNIA GUIANENSIS  ANGILIQUE CRIS
  [Aningeris] ANINGERIA spp.  Aningeria, ANEGRE,
  ANIGRE
  Dipterocarpus [grandiflorus]  [Apilong] APITONG, KERUING
  SPP.
  CENTROLOBIUM SPP.  ARARIBA, AMARILLO
  BROSIMUM UTILE  BACO
  SHOREA SPP.  BALAU, SELANGAN BATU
  Ochroma lagopus  Balsa
  OCHROMA PYRAMIDALE  BALSA
  MYROXYLON BALSAMUM  BALSAMO
  [Virola spp.]  [Banak]
  Anisoptera thurifera  Bella [Rose] ROSA
  [Guibourtis] GUIBOURTIA arnoldiana
  Benge, MUTENYE
  BERLINIA SPP.  BERLINIA, ROSE ZEBRANO
  SYMPHONIA GLOBULIFERA  BOAR WOOD
  Deterium [Senegalese] SENEGALESE  Boire
 S. 4859  4
 
  CAESALPINIA ECHINTATA,  BRAZILWOOD, PERNAMBUCO
  PAUBRASILIA ESCHINATA
  BERTHOLLETIA EXCELS  BRAZIL TREE
  BROSIMUM ALICASTRUM  BREADNUT
  GUILBOURTIA SPP.  BUBINGA, AFRICAN
  (G. DEMUSEI, G. PELLEGRINIANA,  ROSEWOOD, KEVAZINGO
  G. TESSMANNII)
  TOONA CALANTAS, CEDRELA CALANTAS  CALANTAS, KALANTAS
  Priora copaifera  Cativo
  CEDRELA ODORATA, CEDRELA FISSILIS  CEDRO, CEDAR, SPANISH CEDAR,
  SOUTH AMERICAN CEDAR
  CEIBA PENTANDRA  CEIBA
  Antiaris africana  Chenchen, ANTIARIS
  COURATARI GUIANENSIS  COCO BLANCO
  [Dalbergis] DALBERGIA
  retusa  [Concobola] COCOBOLO,
  GRANADILLO
  TABEBUIA DONNELL-SMITHII  COPAL
  DANIELLIA SPP.  COPAL, DANIELLIA
  Cordia spp.  Cordia, BOCOTE, ZIRICOTE, LOURO
  HYMENAEA COURBARIL  COURBARIL, WEST INDIAN LOCUST
  DIPTERYX ODORATA  CUMARU
  PIPTADENIASTRUM AFRICANUM  DAHOMA, BANZU
  CALYCOPHYLLUM CANDIDISSIMUM  DEGAME, LEGAME LANCEWOOD,
  LEMONWOOD
  AFZELIA SPP.  DOUSSIE, LINGUE
  [Diospyros] DIOSPYRUS spp.  Ebony, MACASSAR
  EBONY,
  CEYLON EBONY
  LOPHIRA ALATA  EKKI, AZOBE, BANGASSI, AKOURA,
  RED IRONWOOD
  COMBRETODENDRON MACROCARPUM  ESIA, ESSIA
  CORDIA GOELDIANA  FREIJO, CORDIA WOOD
  CHLOROPHORA TINCTORIA  FUSTIC, YELLOW WOOD, TATAJUBA
  [Aucoumes] AUCOUMEA klaineana  Gaboon, OKOUME
  ASTRONIUM SPP.  GONCALO ALVES, ZEBRAWOOD,
  TIGERWOOD
  OCOTEA RODIAEI  GREENHEART
  ENTEROLOBIUM CYCLOCARPUM  GUANACASTE, RAIN TREE,
  ELEPHANT EAR
  GUAREA SPP.  GUAREA, BOSSE
  TERMINALIA IVORENSIS  IDIGBO, FRAMIRE, BLACK AFARA
  PHOEBE POROSA  IMBUIA, IMBUYA, EMBUIA,
  BRAZILIAN WALNUT
  HANDROANTHUS SPP.  IPE, BRAZILIAN WALNUT,
  BETHABARRA, PAU D'ARCO,
  IRONWOOD, LAPACHO
  Chlorophors excelsa  Iroko
  HYMENAEA COURBARIL  JATOBA, "BRAZILIAN CHERRY"
  JACARANDA COPAIA  JACARANDA
  MACHAERIUM VILLOSUM  JACARANDA PARDO
  DYERA COSTULATA  JELUTONG
  DRYOBALANOPS SPP.  KAPUR, KELADAN
  KOOMPASSIA MALACCENSIS  KEMPAS, IMPAS
  Acacia koa  Koa
  [Entandrophragm a] ENTANDROPHRAGMA CKOSIPO,IOMU
 S. 4859  5
 
  Pterygota macrocarpa  Koto, AFRICAN PTERYGOTA, WARE
  OXANDRA LANCEOLATE  LANCEWOOD
  Shorea SPP. [negrosensis]  [Red]  Lauan, LUAN,
  LAWAAN, MERANTI, WHITE
  MERANTI, YELLOW MERANTI, DARK
  RED MERANTI, LIGHT RED MERANTI,
  SERAYA, TANGUILE, BANG,
  PHILIPPINE MAHOGANY
  [Pentacme contorta]  [White Lauan]
  [Shores ploysprma]  [Tanguile]
  NOTHOFAGUS PUMILIO  LENGA
  GUAIACUM OFFICINALE  LIGNUM VITAE, GUAYACAN,
  IRONWOOD
  Terminalia superba  Limba, AFARA, OFRAM
  [Aniba duckei] ANIBA ROSEDORA  [Louro] BRAZILIAN
  ROSEWOOD, PAU ROSA, BOIS
  DE ROSE
  NECTANDRA SPP.  LOURO PRETO
  [Kyaya ivorensis] KHAYA SPP.  [Africa] AFRICAN
  Mahogany
  [Swletenia macrophylla]  [Amer. Mahogany]
  SWIETENIA SPP.  AMERICAN MAHOGANY, WEST INDIAN
  MAHOGANY, CENTRAL AMERICAN
  MAHOGANY, HONDURAN MAHOGANY,
  SOUTH AMERICAN MAHOGANY,
  MEXICAN MAHOGANY, BIGLEAF
  MAHOGANY, LITTLE LEAF
  MAHOGANY, ACAJOU, CAOBA
  MOGNO
  Tieghemella [leckellii] HECKELII  [Makora]
  MAKORE,
  BAKU
  DIOSPYROS MARMORATA  MARBLEWOOD, ZEBRAWOOD
  INTSIA BIJUGA, INTSIA PALEMBANICA  MERBAU, IPIL, KWILA
  ANISOPTERA SPP.  MERSAWA, KRABAK, PALOSAPIS
  MORA EXCELSA  MORA
  Distemonanthus benthamianus  Movingui, AYAN
  TERMINALIA AMAZONIA  NARGUSTA
  PTEROCARPUS SPP.  NARRA, AMBYNA, PAPUA NEW GUINEA
  ROSEWOOD, RED SANDERS, MUKULA,
  KOSSO, ZITAN, HONGMU
  PALAQUIUM SPP.  NYATOH, PADANG, PENCIL CEDAR
  TRIPLOCHITON SCLEROXYLON  OBECHE, SAMBA
  NAUCLEA DIDERRICHII  OPEPE, SIBO
  Pterocarpus [soyauxii] SPP.  [African] Padauk,
  VERMILLION WOOD
  [Pterocarpus angolensis]  [Angola Padauk]
  MILLETTIA STUHLMANNII  PANGA PANGA
  BALFOURODENDRON RIEDELIANUM  PAU MARFIM
  Aspidosperma spp.  Peroba, ROSA
  PARATECOMA PEROBA  PEROBA BRANCA
  DALBERGIA FRUTESCENS, D. TOMENTOSA  PINKWOOD, BRAZILIA TULIPWOOD
  TABEBUIA DONNELL-SMITHII  PRIMA VERA, ROBLE, DURANGO
  Peltogyne spp.  Purpleheart
  Gonystylus spp.  Ramin
 S. 4859  6
 
  MELANORRHOEA CURTISII  RENGAS, BORNEO ROSEWOOD
  NOTHOFAGUS OBLIQUA  ROBLE
  HEVEA BRASILIENSIS  RUBBERWOOD
  Dalbergia spp.  Rosewood, INDIAN ROSEWOOD,
  HONDURAS ROSEWOOD, COCOBOLO,
  GRANADILLO
  ANIBA DUCKEI  BRAZILIAN ROSEWOOD
  [Entandrophragm a] ENTANDROPHRAGMA
  cylindricum  [Sapela] SAPELE, SAPELLI
  ACANTHOPANAX RICINOFOLIUS  SEN, CASTOR ARABIA
  BROSIMUM AUBLETTI, PIRATINERA  SNAKEWOOD, LETTERWOOD, LEOPARD
  GUIANENSIS  WOOD
  [Shores phillippinensis]  [Sonora]
  JUGLANS SPP. (JUGLANS  SOUTH AMERICAN WALNUT, PERUVIAN
  AUSTRALIS, J. NEOTROPICA,  WALNUT
  J. OLANCHANA, ETC.)
  STERCULIA RHINOPETALA  STERCULIA
  BAGASSA GUIANENSIS  TATAJUBA, BAGASSE
  Tectona grandis  Teak
  Lovoa trichilloides  Tigerwood
  ENTANDROPHRAGMA UTILE  UTILE, SIPO
  VIROLA SPP.  VIROLA, CUMALA, BANAK, TAPSAVA
  Milletia laurentii  Wenge
  PENTACME CONTORTA  WHITE LAUAN
  Microberlinia [brazzavillensis]  Zebrawood,
  SPP.  ZEBRANO, ZINGANA
 
  c.  "Tropical  [rain] forests" shall mean [any and all forests classi-
 fied by the scientific term "Tropical moist forests", the classification
 determined by the equatorial region of the forest and average  rainfall]
 A  NATURAL  ECOSYSTEM WITHIN THE TROPICAL REGIONS, APPROXIMATELY BOUNDED
 GEOGRAPHICALLY BY THE TROPICS OF  CANCER  AND  CAPRICORN,  BUT  POSSIBLY
 AFFECTED  BY  OTHER  FACTORS SUCH AS PREVAILING WINDS, CONTAINING NATIVE
 SPECIES COMPOSITION, STRUCTURE, AND ECOLOGICAL  FUNCTION,  WITH  A  TREE
 CANOPY  COVER  OF  MORE  THAN  TEN  PERCENT OVER AN AREA OF AT LEAST 0.5
 HECTARES. "TROPICAL FORESTS" SHALL INCLUDE ALL  OF  THE  FOLLOWING:  (I)
 HUMAN-MANAGED  TROPICAL  FORESTS  OR PARTIALLY DEGRADED TROPICAL FORESTS
 THAT ARE REGENERATING; AND (II) TROPICAL FORESTS IDENTIFIED BY MULTI-OB-
 JECTIVE  CONSERVATION  BASED  ASSESSMENT  METHODOLOGIES,  SUCH  AS  HIGH
 CONSERVATION  VALUE (HCV) AREAS, AS DEFINED BY THE HCV RESOURCE NETWORK,
 OR HIGH CARBON STOCK FORESTS,  AS  DEFINED  BY  THE  HIGH  CARBON  STOCK
 APPROACH,  OR BY ANOTHER METHODOLOGY WITH EQUIVALENT OR HIGHER STANDARDS
 THAT INCLUDES PRIMARY FORESTS  AND  TROPICAL  PEATLANDS  OF  ANY  DEPTH.
 "TROPICAL FORESTS" SHALL NOT INCLUDE TREE PLANTATIONS OF ANY TYPE.
  d. "Tropical wood products" shall mean any wood products, wholesale or
 retail,  in  any  form,  including  but  not limited to PLYWOOD, veneer,
 furniture, cabinets, paneling, SIDING, moldings, DOORS, doorskins, join-
 ery, FLOORING or sawnwood, which are composed, IN WHOLE OR IN  PART,  of
 tropical hardwood [except plywood].
  e.  "PEAT"  MEANS  A  SOIL  THAT IS RICH IN ORGANIC MATTER COMPOSED OF
 PARTIALLY DECOMPOSED PLANT MATERIALS EQUAL TO OR GREATER THAN 40  CENTI-
 METERS OF THE TOP 100 CENTIMETERS OF THE SOIL.
  F. "TROPICAL PEATLANDS" MEANS WETLANDS WITH A LAYER OF PEAT MADE UP OF
 DEAD  AND  DECAYING  PLANT  MATERIAL. TROPICAL PEATLANDS INCLUDES MOORS,
 BOGS, MIRES, AND PEAT SWAMP FORESTS.
 S. 4859  7
 
  G. "Secondary materials" means any material recovered from  or  other-
 wise destined for the waste stream, including, but not limited to, post-
 consumer  material,  industrial scrap material and overstock or obsolete
 inventories from distributors, wholesalers and other companies but  such
 term  does  not  include those materials and by-products generated from,
 and commonly reused within, an original manufacturing process.
  § 4. Paragraphs b and d of subdivision 2 of section 165 of  the  state
 finance  law, as added by chapter 83 of the laws of 1995, are amended to
 read as follows:
  b. The provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision shall  not  apply
 to:
  (i) [Any hardwoods purchased from a sustained, managed forest; or
  (ii)]  Any binding contractual obligations for purchase of commodities
 entered into prior to August twenty-fifth, nineteen hundred  ninety-one;
 or
  [(iii)  The  purchase  of  any  tropical hardwood or tropical hardwood
 product for which there is no acceptable non-tropical hardwood  species;
 or
  (iv)  Where  the  contracting  officer  finds that no person or entity
 doing business in the state is capable of providing acceptable non-trop-
 ical  hardwood  species  sufficient  to  meet  the  particular  contract
 requirements; or
  (v)]  (II)  Where the inclusion or application of such provisions will
 violate or be inconsistent with the terms  or  conditions  of  a  grant,
 subvention  or  contract  in  an  agency  of  the  United  States or the
 instructions of an authorized representative of  any  such  agency  with
 respect to any such grant, subvention or contract[; or
  (vi)  Where  inclusion  or application of such provisions results in a
 substantial cost increase to the  state,  government  agency,  political
 subdivision, public corporation or public benefit corporation].
  d. The provisions of paragraph c of this subdivision shall not apply:
  (i) To bid packages advertised and made available to the public or any
 competitive  and  sealed  bids  received or entered into prior to August
 twenty-fifth, nineteen hundred ninety-one; or
  (ii) To any amendment, modification or renewal of  a  contract,  which
 contract was entered into prior to August twenty-fifth, nineteen hundred
 ninety-one,  where  such  application would delay timely completion of a
 project or involve an increase in the total monies to be paid under that
 contract; or
  (iii) Where the contracting officer finds that[:
  (A) No person or entity doing business in  the  state  is  capable  of
 performing  the contract using acceptable non-tropical hardwood species;
 or
  (B) The] THE inclusion or application of such provisions will  violate
 or  be  inconsistent with the terms or conditions of a grant, subvention
 or contract with an agency of the United States or the  instructions  of
 an authorized representative of any such agency with respect to any such
 grant, subvention or contract[; or
  (C)  The  use  of  tropical  woods is deemed necessary for purposes of
 historical restoration and there exists  no  available  acceptable  non-
 tropical wood species].
  §  5.  Section 165 of the state finance law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 9 to read as follows:
  9. TROPICAL DEFORESTATION-FREE PROCUREMENT. A. FOR  PURPOSES  OF  THIS
 SUBDIVISION, THE FOLLOWING DEFINITIONS SHALL APPLY:
 S. 4859  8
 
  (I) "CONTRACTOR" MEANS ANY PERSON OR ENTITY THAT HAS A CONTRACT WITH A
 STATE  AGENCY  OR STATE AUTHORITY FOR PUBLIC WORKS OR IMPROVEMENTS TO BE
 PERFORMED, FOR A FRANCHISE, CONCESSION OR LEASE OF PROPERTY,  FOR  GRANT
 MONIES  OR GOODS AND SERVICES OR SUPPLIES TO BE PURCHASED AT THE EXPENSE
 OF  THE AGENCY OR AUTHORITY OR TO BE PAID OUT OF MONIES DEPOSITED IN THE
 TREASURY OR OUT OF TRUST MONIES UNDER THE CONTROL OR  COLLECTED  BY  THE
 AGENCY OR AUTHORITY.
  (II)  "TROPICAL  FOREST-RISK  COMMODITY"  MEANS  ANY COMMODITY AND ITS
 DERIVED PRODUCTS, INCLUDING AGRICULTURAL  AND  NON-AGRICULTURAL  COMMOD-
 ITIES BUT EXCLUDING TROPICAL HARDWOOD AND TROPICAL WOOD PRODUCTS COVERED
 BY SUBDIVISIONS ONE AND TWO OF THIS SECTION, WHETHER IN RAW OR PROCESSED
 FORM,  THAT  IS  COMMONLY  EXTRACTED FROM, OR GROWN, DERIVED, HARVESTED,
 REARED, OR PRODUCED ON LAND WHERE  TROPICAL  DEFORESTATION  OR  TROPICAL
 PRIMARY  FOREST DEGRADATION HAS OCCURRED OR IS LIKELY TO OCCUR. TROPICAL
 FOREST-RISK COMMODITIES INCLUDE PALM OIL, SOY, BEEF, COFFEE, COCOA, WOOD
 PULP, PAPER, LOGS, LUMBER, AND ANY ADDITIONAL COMMODITIES DEFINED BY THE
 COMMISSIONER OF THE OFFICE OF GENERAL SERVICES PURSUANT TO  SUBPARAGRAPH
 (I)  OF  PARAGRAPH  G  OF THIS SUBDIVISION, BUT DO NOT INCLUDE RECOVERED
 FIBER.
  (III) "FREE, PRIOR, AND INFORMED CONSENT" MEANS THE PRINCIPLE  THAT  A
 COMMUNITY  HAS  THE  RIGHT  TO  GIVE OR WITHHOLD ITS CONSENT TO PROPOSED
 DEVELOPMENTS THAT MAY AFFECT THE LAND AND WATERS IT LEGALLY OR CUSTOMAR-
 ILY OWNS, OCCUPIES, OR  OTHERWISE  USES,  AS  DESCRIBED  IN  THE  UNITED
 NATIONS  DECLARATION ON THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES, THE INDIGENOUS
 AND TRIBAL PEOPLES CONVENTION OF 1989, ALSO KNOWN AS  THE  INTERNATIONAL
 LABOR  ORGANIZATION CONVENTION 169, AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS.
 "FREE, PRIOR, AND INFORMED CONSENT" MEANS INFORMED, NONCOERCIVE  NEGOTI-
 ATIONS  BETWEEN  INVESTORS,  COMPANIES,  OR  GOVERNMENTS, AND INDIGENOUS
 PEOPLES AND LOCAL COMMUNITIES, PRIOR TO PROJECT DEVELOPMENT.
  (IV) "LARGE CONTRACTOR" MEANS ANY CONTRACTOR WHOSE ANNUAL REVENUE,  OR
 THAT  OF  THEIR  PARENT COMPANY, IS EQUAL TO OR GREATER THAN ONE HUNDRED
 MILLION DOLLARS.
  (V) "POINT-OF-ORIGIN" MEANS THE GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION,  AS  IDENTIFIED
 BY  THE  SMALLEST  ADMINISTRATIVE  UNIT  OF  LAND, WHERE A COMMODITY WAS
 GROWN, DERIVED, HARVESTED, REARED, OR PRODUCED.
  (VI) "RECOVERED FIBER" MEANS POSTCONSUMER FIBER SUCH AS PAPER,  PAPER-
 BOARD,  AND  FIBROUS  MATERIALS  FROM  RETAIL  STORES, OFFICE BUILDINGS,
 HOMES, AND SO FORTH,  AFTER  HAVING  PASSED  THROUGH  THEIR  END  USAGE,
 INCLUDING  USED  CORRUGATED  BOXES, OLD NEWSPAPERS, OLD MAGAZINES, MIXED
 WASTE PAPER, TABULATING CARDS, AND USED CORDAGE, AND ALL  PAPER,  PAPER-
 BOARD, AND FIBROUS MATERIALS THAT ENTER AND ARE COLLECTED FROM MUNICIPAL
 SOLID  WASTE;  AND MANUFACTURING WASTES SUCH AS DRY PAPER AND PAPERBOARD
 WASTE GENERATED AFTER COMPLETION OF THE PAPERMAKING  PROCESS,  INCLUDING
 ENVELOPE  CUTTINGS,  BINDERY  TRIMMINGS,  AND OTHER PAPER AND PAPERBOARD
 WASTE RESULTING FROM PRINTING, CUTTING, FORMING,  AND  OTHER  CONVERTING
 OPERATIONS,  BAG,  BOX, AND CARTON MANUFACTURING WASTES, AND BUTT ROLLS,
 MILL WRAPPERS, AND REJECTED UNUSED STOCK, AND  REPULPED  FINISHED  PAPER
 AND  PAPERBOARD  FROM  OBSOLETE  INVENTORIES  OF  PAPER  AND  PAPERBOARD
 MANUFACTURERS, MERCHANTS, WHOLESALERS,  DEALERS,  PRINTERS,  CONVERTERS,
 AND OTHERS.
  (VII)  "TROPICAL  DEFORESTATION" MEANS DIRECT HUMAN-INDUCED CONVERSION
 OF TROPICAL FOREST TO AGRICULTURE, A TREE PLANTATION, OR OTHER  NON-FOR-
 EST LAND USE.
  (VIII)  "TROPICAL  PRIMARY  FOREST  DEGRADATION"  MEANS  SEVERE  AND
 SUSTAINED DEGRADATION OF A  TROPICAL  FOREST  RESULTING  IN  SIGNIFICANT
 S. 4859  9
 
 PRIMARY  FOREST  LOSS  AND/OR  A PROFOUND CHANGE IN SPECIES COMPOSITION,
 STRUCTURE, OR ECOLOGICAL FUNCTION OF THAT FOREST.
  (IX)  "PRIMARY FOREST" MEANS A FOREST THAT HAS NEVER BEEN INDUSTRIALLY
 LOGGED AND  HAS  DEVELOPED  FOLLOWING  NATURAL  DISTURBANCES  AND  UNDER
 NATURAL  PROCESSES,  REGARDLESS  OF  ITS  AGE.  PRIMARY  FORESTS INCLUDE
 FORESTS  THAT  HAVE  EXPERIENCED  NON-INDUSTRIAL-SCALE  HUMAN  IMPACTS,
 INCLUDING  TRADITIONAL  OR SUBSISTENCE ACTIVITIES CARRIED OUT BY INDIGE-
 NOUS COMMUNITIES.
  (X)  "NEW  YORK  STATE  PRODUCTS"  MEANS  PRODUCTS  THAT  ARE  GROWN,
 HARVESTED,  OR  PRODUCED  IN  THIS STATE, OR PROCESSED INSIDE OR OUTSIDE
 THIS STATE  COMPRISING  OVER  FIFTY-ONE  PERCENT  RAW  MATERIALS  GROWN,
 HARVESTED, OR PRODUCED IN THIS STATE, BY WEIGHT OR VOLUME.
  (XI)  "SMALL  BUSINESS" MEANS SMALL BUSINESS AS DEFINED IN SECTION ONE
 HUNDRED THIRTY-ONE OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LAW.
  (XII) "MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESS" SHALL MEAN A BUSINESS THAT  IS  RESIDENT
 IN  THIS  STATE,  INDEPENDENTLY  OWNED AND OPERATED, NOT DOMINANT IN ITS
 FIELD, AND EMPLOYS BETWEEN ONE HUNDRED AND FIVE HUNDRED PERSONS.
  (XIII) "MINORITY-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE" SHALL HAVE THE SAME  MEAN-
 ING AS IN ARTICLE FIFTEEN-A OF THE EXECUTIVE LAW.
  (XIV) "WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE" SHALL HAVE THE SAME MEANING AS
 IN ARTICLE FIFTEEN-A OF THE EXECUTIVE LAW.
  B. (I) EVERY CONTRACT ENTERED INTO BY A STATE AGENCY OR AUTHORITY THAT
 INCLUDES THE PROCUREMENT OF ANY PRODUCT COMPRISED WHOLLY OR IN PART OF A
 TROPICAL FOREST-RISK COMMODITY SHALL REQUIRE THAT THE CONTRACTOR CERTIFY
 THAT  THE  COMMODITY FURNISHED TO THE STATE PURSUANT TO THE CONTRACT WAS
 NOT EXTRACTED FROM, GROWN, DERIVED, HARVESTED, REARED,  OR  PRODUCED  ON
 LAND WHERE TROPICAL DEFORESTATION OR TROPICAL PRIMARY FOREST DEGRADATION
 OCCURRED  ON  OR  AFTER  JANUARY  FIRST,  TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-THREE. THE
 CONTRACTOR SHALL AGREE TO COMPLY WITH THIS PROVISION OF THE CONTRACT.
  (II) THE CONTRACT SHALL SPECIFY THAT THE  CONTRACTOR  IS  REQUIRED  TO
 COOPERATE  FULLY  IN  PROVIDING  REASONABLE  ACCESS  TO THE CONTRACTOR'S
 RECORDS,  DOCUMENTS,  AGENTS,  EMPLOYEES,  OR  PREMISES  IF  REASONABLY
 REQUIRED BY AUTHORIZED OFFICIALS OF THE CONTRACTING AGENCY OR AUTHORITY,
 THE  OFFICE  OF GENERAL SERVICES, THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, OR
 THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION, TO DETERMINE THE  CONTRAC-
 TOR'S  COMPLIANCE  WITH  THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
 PARAGRAPH.
  (III) CONTRACTORS SHALL EXERCISE DUE DILIGENCE IN ENSURING THAT  THEIR
 SUBCONTRACTORS  COMPLY  WITH  THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF
 THIS PARAGRAPH.  CONTRACTORS SHALL REQUIRE EACH SUBCONTRACTOR TO CERTIFY
 THAT THE SUBCONTRACTOR IS IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBPAR-
 AGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.
  (IV) IN ADDITION TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBPARAGRAPHS  (I),  (II)  AND
 (III)  OF  THIS PARAGRAPH, LARGE CONTRACTORS SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
 OF THIS PARAGRAPH MUST CERTIFY THAT THEY HAVE ADOPTED A TROPICAL  FOREST
 POLICY  THAT  COMPLIES  WITH REGULATIONS ISSUED PURSUANT TO SUBPARAGRAPH
 (VII) OF PARAGRAPH G OF THIS SUBDIVISION. THE  ADOPTION  OF  A  TROPICAL
 FOREST  POLICY BY A CONTRACTOR, SUBCONTRACTOR, OR SUPPLIER THAT IS NOT A
 LARGE CONTRACTOR IS NOT REQUIRED BY THIS SUBPARAGRAPH BUT MAY BE USED TO
 DEMONSTRATE COMPLIANCE WITH SUBPARAGRAPH (I)  OF  THIS  PARAGRAPH.  SUCH
 TROPICAL FOREST POLICY AND ALL CORRESPONDING DATA SHALL BE MADE PUBLICLY
 AVAILABLE, AND SHALL CONTAIN AT A MINIMUM ALL OF THE FOLLOWING:
  A.  DUE DILIGENCE MEASURES TO IDENTIFY THE POINT-OF-ORIGIN OF TROPICAL
 FOREST-RISK COMMODITIES AND ENSURE  COMPLIANCE  WITH  THE  POLICY  WHERE
 SUPPLY CHAIN RISKS ARE PRESENT.
 S. 4859  10
 
  B.  DATA  DETAILING THE COMPLETE LIST OF DIRECT AND INDIRECT SUPPLIERS
 AND SUPPLY CHAIN TRACEABILITY INFORMATION, INCLUDING  REFINERIES,  PROC-
 ESSING  PLANTS,  FARMS,  AND  PLANTATIONS,  AND THEIR RESPECTIVE OWNERS,
 PARENT COMPANIES, AND FARMERS, MAPS, AND GEO-LOCATIONS, FOR  EACH  TROP-
 ICAL  FOREST-RISK  COMMODITY  FOUND IN PRODUCTS THAT MAY BE FURNISHED TO
 THE STATE.
  C. MEASURES TAKEN TO ENSURE THE PRODUCT DOES NOT CONTRIBUTE  TO  TROP-
 ICAL DEFORESTATION OR TROPICAL PRIMARY FOREST DEGRADATION, INCLUDING:
  (1)  NO  DEVELOPMENT IN TROPICAL PRIMARY FORESTS, AND THAT THE PRODUCT
 DOES NOT ORIGINATE FROM A SITE WHERE COMMODITY PRODUCTION  HAS  REPLACED
 TROPICAL PRIMARY FORESTS AFTER JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-THREE;
  (2) NO DEVELOPMENT OF HIGH CARBON STOCK (HCS) FORESTS;
  (3) NO DEVELOPMENT OF HIGH CONSERVATION VALUE (HCV) AREAS;
  (4) NO BURNING;
  (5)  EFFORTS  TO ENSURE PROGRESSIVE REDUCTIONS OF GREENHOUSE GAS EMIS-
 SIONS ON EXISTING PLANTATIONS;
  (6) NO DEVELOPMENT ON PEAT, REGARDLESS OF DEPTH;
  (7) BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES FOR EXISTING PLANTATIONS ON PEAT; AND
  (8) WHERE FEASIBLE, ACTIVITIES ORIENTED TOWARDS PEAT RESTORATION.
  D. MEASURES TAKEN TO PREVENT EXPLOITATION AND  REDRESS  GRIEVANCES  OF
 WORKERS AND LOCAL COMMUNITIES, INCLUDING:
  (1) RESPECT FOR AND RECOGNITION OF THE RIGHTS OF ALL WORKERS INCLUDING
 CONTRACT, TEMPORARY, AND MIGRANT WORKERS.
  (2) RESPECT FOR AND RECOGNITION OF LAND TENURE RIGHTS OF COMMUNITIES.
  (3) RESPECT FOR THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS AND LOCAL COMMUNITIES TO GIVE
 OR  WITHHOLD  THEIR  FREE,  PRIOR, AND INFORMED CONSENT TO OPERATIONS ON
 LANDS TO WHICH THEY HOLD LEGAL, COMMUNAL, OR CUSTOMARY RIGHTS.
  (4) EXPLICIT POLICIES AND PROCESSES TO PREVENT VIOLENCE, INTIMIDATION,
 AND COERCION OF WORKERS AND LOCAL COMMUNITIES.
  (5) FORMAL, OPEN, TRANSPARENT, AND CONSULTATIVE PROCESSES  TO  ADDRESS
 AND REDRESS ALL COMPLAINTS AND CONFLICTS.
  E.  MEASURES TAKEN TO PROTECT BIODIVERSITY AND PREVENT THE POACHING OF
 ENDANGERED SPECIES IN ALL OPERATIONS AND ADJACENT AREAS.
  F. MEASURES TAKEN TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE  WITH  THE  LAWS  OF  COUNTRIES
 WHERE  TROPICAL FOREST-RISK COMMODITIES IN A COMPANY'S SUPPLY CHAIN WERE
 PRODUCED.
  G. MEASURES TO DETER VIOLENCE, THREATS, AND HARASSMENT  AGAINST  ENVI-
 RONMENTAL  HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS (EHRDS), INCLUDING RESPECTING INTERNA-
 TIONALLY RECOGNIZED HUMAN RIGHTS  STANDARDS,  AND  EDUCATING  EMPLOYEES,
 CONTRACTORS, AND PARTNERS ON THE RIGHTS OF EHRDS TO EXPRESS THEIR VIEWS,
 CONDUCT  PEACEFUL PROTESTS, AND CRITICIZE PRACTICES WITHOUT INTIMIDATION
 OR RETALIATION.
  (V) THE PROVISIONS OF SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF  THIS  PARAGRAPH  SHALL  NOT
 APPLY  WHEN THE INCLUSION OR APPLICATION OF SUCH PROVISIONS WILL VIOLATE
 OR BE INCONSISTENT WITH THE TERMS OR CONDITIONS OF A  GRANT,  SUBVENTION
 OR  CONTRACT  WITH AN AGENCY OF THE UNITED STATES OR THE INSTRUCTIONS OF
 AN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF ANY SUCH AGENCY WITH RESPECT TO ANY SUCH
 GRANT, SUBVENTION OR CONTRACT.
  C. (I) IF IT IS DETERMINED THAT ANY CONTRACTOR  CONTRACTING  WITH  THE
 STATE  KNEW  OR  SHOULD HAVE KNOWN THAT A PRODUCT COMPRISED WHOLLY OR IN
 PART OF A TROPICAL FOREST-RISK COMMODITY WAS FURNISHED TO THE  STATE  IN
 VIOLATION  OF PARAGRAPH B OF THIS SUBDIVISION, THE CONTRACTING AGENCY OR
 AUTHORITY SHALL ISSUE A WRITTEN  NOTICE  OF  VIOLATION  AND  PROVIDE  AN
 OPPORTUNITY  FOR SUCH CONTRACTOR TO COME INTO COMPLIANCE. IF, AFTER SUCH
 NOTICE, A CONTRACTOR FAILS TO COME INTO COMPLIANCE  WITHIN  A  TIMEFRAME
 ESTABLISHED  BY THE DEPARTMENT, SUCH CONTRACTOR MAY, SUBJECT TO SUBPARA-
 S. 4859  11
 
 GRAPH (II) OF PARAGRAPH B OF THIS SUBDIVISION, HAVE EITHER  OR  BOTH  OF
 THE FOLLOWING SANCTIONS IMPOSED:
  A.  THE  CONTRACT  UNDER  WHICH  THE  PROHIBITED  TROPICAL FOREST-RISK
 COMMODITY WAS FURNISHED MAY BE VOIDED AT THE OPTION OF THE STATE  AGENCY
 OR AUTHORITY TO WHICH THE COMMODITY WAS FURNISHED.
  B.  THE CONTRACTOR MAY BE ASSESSED A PENALTY THAT SHALL BE THE GREATER
 OF ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS OR AN AMOUNT  EQUALING  TWENTY  PERCENT  OF  THE
 VALUE OF THE PRODUCT THAT THE STATE AGENCY OR AUTHORITY DEMONSTRATES WAS
 COMPRISED  WHOLLY  OR  IN  PART  OF A TROPICAL FOREST-RISK COMMODITY AND
 FURNISHED TO THE STATE IN VIOLATION OF PARAGRAPH B OF THIS  SUBDIVISION.
 A  HEARING  OR  OPPORTUNITY  TO  BE HEARD SHALL BE PROVIDED PRIOR TO THE
 ASSESSMENT OF ANY PENALTY.
  (II) NOTWITHSTANDING SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A  CONTRACTOR
 THAT HAS COMPLIED WITH THE PROVISIONS OF SUBPARAGRAPH (III) OF PARAGRAPH
 B  OF THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL NOT BE SUBJECT TO SANCTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS,
 OF WHICH THE CONTRACTOR HAD NO KNOWLEDGE, OF THE REQUIREMENTS  OF  PARA-
 GRAPH  B OF THIS SUBDIVISION THAT WERE COMMITTED SOLELY BY A SUBCONTRAC-
 TOR. SANCTIONS DESCRIBED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH  SHALL
 INSTEAD  BE  IMPOSED  AGAINST  THE  SUBCONTRACTOR  THAT  COMMITTED  THE
 VIOLATION.
  D. (I) ANY STATE AGENCY OR AUTHORITY  THAT  INVESTIGATES  A  COMPLAINT
 AGAINST  A CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR FOR VIOLATION OF THIS SUBDIVISION
 MAY LIMIT ITS INVESTIGATION TO EVALUATING THE  INFORMATION  PROVIDED  BY
 THE  PERSON  OR  ENTITY  SUBMITTING  THE  COMPLAINT  AND THE INFORMATION
 PROVIDED BY THE CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR.
  (II) WHENEVER A CONTRACTING  OFFICER  OF  THE  CONTRACTING  AGENCY  OR
 AUTHORITY  HAS  REASON  TO  BELIEVE THAT THE CONTRACTOR FAILED TO COMPLY
 WITH PARAGRAPH B OF THIS SUBDIVISION,  THE  AGENCY  OR  AUTHORITY  SHALL
 REFER THE MATTER FOR INVESTIGATION TO THE HEAD OF THE AGENCY OR AUTHORI-
 TY  AND,  AS THE HEAD OF THE AGENCY OR AUTHORITY DETERMINES APPROPRIATE,
 TO EITHER THE OFFICE OF GENERAL SERVICES, THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  ATTORNEY
 GENERAL, OR THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION.
  E. (I) WHEN A STATE AGENCY OR AUTHORITY'S CONTRACT FOR THE PURCHASE OF
 A  COMMODITY  OR PRODUCT COVERED BY THIS SUBDIVISION IS TO BE AWARDED TO
 THE LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER, AN OTHERWISE QUALIFIED BIDDER  WHO  IS  A
 SMALL  OR  MEDIUM-SIZED  BUSINESS  OR A MINORITY OR WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS
 ENTERPRISE, OR WHO WILL FULFILL THE CONTRACT THROUGH THE USE OF NEW YORK
 STATE PRODUCTS, MAY BE GIVEN PREFERENCE  OVER  OTHER  BIDDERS,  PROVIDED
 THAT  THE  COST INCLUDED IN THE BID IS NOT MORE THAN TEN PERCENT GREATER
 THAN THE COST INCLUDED IN A BID THAT IS NOT FROM A SMALL OR MEDIUM-SIZED
 BUSINESS OR A MINORITY OR WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE  OR  FULFILLED
 THROUGH THE USE OF NEW YORK STATE PRODUCTS.
  (II)  THE  PROVISIONS OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL NOT APPLY IF THE HEAD OF
 THE CONTRACTING STATE AGENCY OR AUTHORITY PURCHASING SUCH  PRODUCTS,  IN
 HIS OR HER SOLE DISCRETION, DETERMINES THAT GIVING PREFERENCE TO BIDDERS
 PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS PARAGRAPH WOULD BE:
  (A) AGAINST THE PUBLIC INTEREST;
  (B) WOULD INCREASE THE COST OF THE CONTRACT BY AN UNREASONABLE AMOUNT;
 OR
  (C)  NEW  YORK  STATE  PRODUCTS  CANNOT  BE OBTAINED IN SUFFICIENT AND
 REASONABLE AVAILABLE QUANTITIES AND OF SATISFACTORY QUALITY TO MEET  THE
 CONTRACTING STATE AGENCY OR AUTHORITY'S REQUIREMENTS.
  (III) NOTHING IN THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO CONFLICT WITH OR
 OTHERWISE  LIMIT  THE  GOALS  AND  REQUIREMENTS SET FORTH BY SECTION ONE
 HUNDRED SIXTY-TWO OF THIS ARTICLE AND ARTICLES FIFTEEN-A AND SEVENTEEN-B
 OF THE EXECUTIVE LAW.
 S. 4859  12
 
  F. (I) THE COMMISSIONER  OF THE  OFFICE  OF  GENERAL  SERVICES  SHALL
 CONVENE  A  STAKEHOLDER  ADVISORY  GROUP WHICH SHALL BE CONSULTED ON THE
 CREATION OF REGULATIONS PURSUANT TO PARAGRAPH  G  OF  THIS  SUBDIVISION.
 MEMBERS  OF THE ADVISORY GROUP SHALL BE SELECTED BY THE COMMISSIONER AND
 SHALL CONSIST OF AT LEAST:
  (A)  REPRESENTATIVES OF CURRENT OR FORMER STATE CONTRACTORS DEALING IN
 EACH OF THE TROPICAL FOREST-RISK COMMODITIES SPECIFIED  IN  SUBPARAGRAPH
 (II)  OF  PARAGRAPH A OF THIS SUBDIVISION, WITH AN EMPHASIS ON SMALL AND
 MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESSES;
  (B) REPRESENTATIVES FROM CIVIL  SOCIETY  WITH  RELEVANT  EXPERTISE  IN
 SUPPLY CHAIN TRACEABILITY, TROPICAL FOREST SUSTAINABILITY, BIODIVERSITY,
 CLIMATE  SCIENCE, HUMAN AND LABOR RIGHTS, AND INDIGENOUS RIGHTS. MEMBERS
 SELECTED PURSUANT TO THIS CLAUSE SHOULD BE OF AT LEAST EQUAL  NUMBER  TO
 MEMBERS SELECTED PURSUANT TO CLAUSE (A) OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH; AND
  (C) A MINIMUM OF TWO ADDITIONAL REPRESENTATIVES FROM INDIGENOUS COMMU-
 NITIES  WITHIN  THE GEOGRAPHIC AREAS CONTAINING TROPICAL FORESTS COVERED
 BY THIS SUBDIVISION.
  (II) MEMBERS OF THE STAKEHOLDER ADVISORY GROUP SHALL RECEIVE NO  SALA-
 RY,  BUT  SHALL  BE REIMBURSED BY THE OFFICE OF GENERAL SERVICES FOR ANY
 NECESSARY TRAVEL EXPENSES RELATED TO PARTICIPATING  IN  THE  STAKEHOLDER
 ADVISORY GROUP.
  G.  ON OR BEFORE JULY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR, THE OFFICE OF
 GENERAL SERVICES SHALL ISSUE REGULATIONS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF  THIS
 SUBDIVISION.  SUCH  REGULATIONS  SHALL BE DEVELOPED IN CONSULTATION WITH
 THE STAKEHOLDER ADVISORY GROUP ESTABLISHED IN PARAGRAPH F OF THIS SUBDI-
 VISION AND THE COMMISSIONER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF  ENVIRONMENTAL  CONSER-
 VATION.  SUCH REGULATIONS SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, ALL OF
 THE FOLLOWING:
  (I) A LIST OF TROPICAL FOREST-RISK COMMODITIES SUBJECT TO THE REQUIRE-
 MENTS OF THIS SUBDIVISION, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PALM OIL, SOY,
 BEEF, COFFEE, COCOA, WOOD PULP, PAPER, LOGS, AND LUMBER. THE LIST  SHALL
 BE  REVIEWED  AND  UPDATED  AT  LEAST EVERY THREE YEARS. WHEN EVALUATING
 INCLUSION OF ADDITIONAL COMMODITIES IN THE LIST, THE COMMISSIONER OF THE
 OFFICE OF GENERAL SERVICES SHALL CONSIDER THE IMPACT OF THE COMMODITY AS
 A DRIVER OF TROPICAL DEFORESTATION OR TROPICAL PRIMARY  FOREST  DEGRADA-
 TION,  THE  STATE OF EXISTING SUPPLY CHAIN TRANSPARENCY AND TRACEABILITY
 SYSTEMS FOR THE COMMODITY, AND THE FEASIBILITY OF INCLUDING THE  COMMOD-
 ITY IN THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH B OF THIS  SUBDIVISION.  THE  FIRST
 REVIEW SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO EVALUATION OF RUBBER, LEATH-
 ER  AND  OTHER  CATTLE-DERIVED  PRODUCTS,  AND MINING PRODUCTS INCLUDING
 COAL, IRON, COPPER, GOLD, TIN, DIAMONDS, MANGANESE, BAUXITE AND NICKEL.
  (II) A LIST OF PRODUCTS  DERIVED  WHOLLY  OR  IN  PART  FROM  TROPICAL
 FOREST-RISK COMMODITIES.
  (III)  A  LIST  OF  PRODUCTS  FURNISHED  TO THE STATE OR USED BY STATE
 CONTRACTORS IN HIGH-VOLUME PURCHASES THAT CONTAIN OR ARE COMPRISED WHOL-
 LY OR IN PART OF TROPICAL FOREST-RISK COMMODITIES.
  (IV) A SET OF RESPONSIBLE SOURCING  GUIDELINES  AND  POLICIES  DERIVED
 FROM BEST PRACTICES IN SUPPLY CHAIN TRANSPARENCY TO THE POINT-OF-ORIGIN.
  (V) GUIDANCE TO ASSIST CONTRACTORS IN IDENTIFYING TROPICAL FOREST-RISK
 COMMODITIES IN THEIR SUPPLY CHAIN, PERFORMING NECESSARY DUE DILIGENCE TO
 MEET  THE  REQUIREMENTS  OF  THIS  SUBDIVISION,  AND CERTIFYING THAT THE
 COMMODITY DID NOT  CONTRIBUTE  TO  TROPICAL  DEFORESTATION  OR  TROPICAL
 PRIMARY FOREST DEGRADATION.
  (VI)  A  LIST OF FAVORED SUPPLIERS OF TROPICAL FOREST-RISK COMMODITIES
 AND PRODUCTS DERIVED  THEREFROM  WHOSE PRODUCTS HAVE BEEN DETERMINED  TO
 MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBDIVISION.
 S. 4859  13

  (VII)  THE  FULL SET OF REQUIREMENTS FOR A LARGE CONTRACTOR'S TROPICAL
 FOREST POLICY PURSUANT TO SUBPARAGRAPH  (IV)  OF  PARAGRAPH  B  OF  THIS
 SUBDIVISION.
  (VIII)  THE  PROCESS  THROUGH  WHICH  CONTRACTORS SHALL CERTIFY TO THE
 OFFICE OF GENERAL SERVICES THAT THEY ARE IN COMPLIANCE WITH PARAGRAPH  B
 OF THIS SUBDIVISION.
  (IX)  A  PROCESS  FOR ENSURING THAT DETAILS OF CERTIFIED CONTRACTS ARE
 MADE AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION ON THE WEBSITE  OF  THE  OFFICE  OF
 GENERAL SERVICES.
  (X)  AN  EASILY  ACCESSIBLE PROCEDURE TO RECEIVE PUBLIC COMPLAINTS AND
 INFORMATION REGARDING VIOLATIONS OF THIS SUBDIVISION.
  H. (I) THE CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS SET FORTH  IN  THIS  SUBDIVISION
 SHALL  NOT APPLY TO A CREDIT CARD PURCHASE OF GOODS OF TWO THOUSAND FIVE
 HUNDRED DOLLARS OR LESS.
  (II) THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF GOODS EXEMPTED PURSUANT TO  SUBPARAGRAPH  (I)
 OF  THIS  PARAGRAPH SHALL NOT EXCEED SEVEN THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS
 PER YEAR FOR EACH CONTRACTOR FROM WHICH A STATE AGENCY OR  AUTHORITY  IS
 PURCHASING  GOODS BY CREDIT CARD. IT SHALL BE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF EACH
 STATE AGENCY TO MONITOR THE USE OF THIS EXEMPTION AND  ADHERE  TO  THESE
 RESTRICTIONS ON THESE PURCHASES.
  I.  THIS  SUBDIVISION  SHALL  APPLY  TO  ALL  CONTRACTS  ENTERED INTO,
 EXTENDED, OR RENEWED ON OR AFTER JANUARY  FIRST,  TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY-
 FIVE.
  J.  COMMENCING  TWO YEARS AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SUBDIVISION
 AND BIENNIALLY THEREAFTER, THE COMMISSIONER OF  THE  OFFICE  OF  GENERAL
 SERVICES  SHALL  ISSUE A REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR, THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT
 OF THE SENATE, AND THE SPEAKER OF THE ASSEMBLY, ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
 THIS SUBDIVISION AND SUBDIVISIONS ONE AND TWO OF THIS SECTION.
  § 6. The economic development law is amended by adding a  new  article
 27 to read as follows:
  ARTICLE 27
  SUPPLY CHAIN TRANSPARENCY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
 SECTION 490. DEFINITIONS.
  491. THE SUPPLY CHAIN TRANSPARENCY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
  § 490. DEFINITIONS. FOR PURPOSES OF THIS ARTICLE:
  1.  "SMALL  BUSINESS" MEANS A SMALL BUSINESS AS DEFINED IN SECTION ONE
 HUNDRED THIRTY-ONE OF THIS CHAPTER.
  2. "MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESS" SHALL MEAN A BUSINESS THAT IS  RESIDENT  IN
 THIS STATE, INDEPENDENTLY OWNED AND OPERATED, NOT DOMINANT IN ITS FIELD,
 AND EMPLOYS BETWEEN ONE HUNDRED AND FIVE HUNDRED PERSONS.
  3.  "ELIGIBLE BUSINESS" SHALL MEAN ANY SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESS
 AS DEFINED IN THIS ARTICLE, AND ANY  MINORITY  OR  WOMEN-OWNED  BUSINESS
 ENTERPRISE AS DEFINED IN ARTICLE FIFTEEN-A OF THE EXECUTIVE LAW.
  4.  "SUPPLY  CHAIN"  SHALL  MEAN  A  SYSTEM OF EXTRACTION, PRODUCTION,
 TRANSPORTATION, AND DISTRIBUTION INVOLVING MULTIPLE PROCESSES, ORGANIZA-
 TIONS, INDIVIDUALS, AND RESOURCES,  BEGINNING  WITH  RAW  MATERIALS  AND
 CULMINATING IN THE DELIVERY OF A PRODUCT OR SERVICE TO A CONSUMER.
  § 491. THE  SUPPLY  CHAIN  TRANSPARENCY  ASSISTANCE  PROGRAM.  1.  THE
 DEPARTMENT IS HEREBY AUTHORIZED AND DIRECTED, WITHIN  ONE  YEAR  OF  THE
 EFFECTIVE  DATE  OF  THIS ARTICLE, TO ESTABLISH, DEVELOP, IMPLEMENT, AND
 MAINTAIN, WITHIN AVAILABLE APPROPRIATIONS, A SUPPLY  CHAIN  TRANSPARENCY
 ASSISTANCE  PROGRAM  TO  ASSIST  SMALL  AND  MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESSES AND
 MINORITY AND WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESSES IN ACHIEVING SUPPLY CHAINS THAT ARE:
  (A) TRANSPARENT, MEANING A SUPPLY CHAIN FOR WHICH SUFFICIENT  INFORMA-
 TION  HAS BEEN DISCLOSED REGARDING ALL RELEVANT UNITS OF PRODUCTION FROM
 THE RAW MATERIAL STAGE TO THE DELIVERY OF A  PRODUCT  OR  SERVICE  TO  A
 S. 4859  14

 CONSUMER,  INCLUDING,  BUT  NOT LIMITED TO, EXTRACTION SITES, SUPPLIERS,
 MANUFACTURERS,  TRANSPORTERS,  WHOLESALERS,  AND  RETAILERS,  TO  ALLOW
 CONSUMERS TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE SUPPLY CHAIN IS ETHICAL AND SUSTAINA-
 BLE.
  (B)  TRACEABLE, MEANING A SUPPLY CHAIN FOR WHICH DISTRIBUTORS, RETAIL-
 ERS, AND OTHER BUSINESSES DOWN THE  SUPPLY  CHAIN  ARE  ABLE  TO  GATHER
 SUFFICIENT  AND  RELEVANT  INFORMATION REGARDING ALL UNITS OF PRODUCTION
 FURTHER UP THE SUPPLY CHAIN TO  DETERMINE  WHETHER  A  SUPPLY  CHAIN  IS
 ETHICAL AND SUSTAINABLE.
  (C)  ETHICAL, MEANING A SUPPLY CHAIN THAT UPHOLDS THE HUMAN RIGHTS AND
 ALL OTHER LEGAL  RIGHTS,  SUPPORTS  THE  WELL-BEING,  AND  PREVENTS  THE
 EXPLOITATION,  OF  WORKERS  AND  COMMUNITIES,  AND  GUARANTEES THE FREE,
 PRIOR, AND INFORMED CONSENT, LAND, AND OTHER LEGAL  RIGHTS  OF  AFFECTED
 INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND OTHER LOCAL AND TRADITIONAL COMMUNITIES.
  (D) SUSTAINABLE, MEANING A SUPPLY CHAIN THAT TAKES ALL NECESSARY MEAS-
 URES TO AVOID, MINIMIZE, AND REDUCE DEGRADATION OF NATURAL ENVIRONMENTAL
 SYSTEMS,  AND  MAXIMIZES  EFFORTS  TO  CONTRIBUTE TO THE RESTORATION AND
 REGENERATION OF IMPACTED ECOSYSTEMS.
  2. THE PURPOSE OF SUCH PROGRAM SHALL BE TO:
  (A) DEVELOP AND SHARE BEST PRACTICES AND PROVIDE TECHNICAL  ASSISTANCE
 TO  HELP  PARTICIPATING ELIGIBLE BUSINESSES DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT STAND-
 ARDS, PLANS, AND BENCHMARKS FOR TRANSPARENCY AND TRACEABILITY,  ENVIRON-
 MENTAL  SUSTAINABILITY,  AND  ETHICAL  PRACTICES THROUGHOUT THEIR SUPPLY
 CHAINS.
  (B) ASSIST PARTICIPATING  ELIGIBLE  BUSINESSES  WITH  COMPLIANCE  WITH
 SUPPLY  CHAIN RELATED REGULATIONS, PROCUREMENT STANDARDS, OR CONTRACTING
 REQUIREMENTS.
  (C) IDENTIFY FUNDING STREAMS, GRANT MONIES, FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE  AND
 OTHER  RESOURCES  THAT  MAY  BE AVAILABLE TO HELP PARTICIPATING ELIGIBLE
 BUSINESSES ACHIEVE  TRANSPARENT,  TRACEABLE,  ETHICAL,  AND  SUSTAINABLE
 SUPPLY CHAINS.
  (D)  HELP  PARTICIPATING  ELIGIBLE BUSINESSES WITH MARKETING, COMMUNI-
 CATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES TO ACHIEVE  MAXIMUM  COMPETITIVE  ADVANTAGE
 FROM  THEIR  TRANSPARENT,  TRACEABLE,  ETHICAL,  AND  SUSTAINABLE SUPPLY
 CHAINS.
  (E) CONDUCT MARKET ANALYSIS TO IDENTIFY OPPORTUNITIES FOR  PARTICIPAT-
 ING  ELIGIBLE BUSINESSES TO ACCESS NEW MARKETS AND INCREASE COMPETITIVE-
 NESS THROUGH ACHIEVING TRANSPARENT, TRACEABLE, ETHICAL, AND  SUSTAINABLE
 SUPPLY CHAINS.
  (F)  CONDUCT OUTREACH TO PROMOTE AWARENESS OF THE PROGRAM AMONG ELIGI-
 BLE BUSINESSES, BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS, AND REGIONAL AND LOCAL  ECONOMIC
 DEVELOPMENT AGENCIES.
  §  7.  This  act  shall take effect immediately and shall apply to all
 contracts and binding contractual obligations entered into on and  after
 such effective date.