# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Private Sidney A. Scofield Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** S4898A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Rolison
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4898A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4898A)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system in the town of Fishkill, Dutchess county as the "Private Sidney A. Scofield Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4898
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ROLISON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "Private Sidney A.  Scofield  Memorial
  Highway"

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 345-b to
 read as follows:
  ยง 345-B. PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED  AS  THE
 "PRIVATE  SIDNEY  A. SCOFIELD MEMORIAL HIGHWAY". ALL THAT PORTION OF THE
 NEW YORK STATE ROUTE NINE-D BETWEEN THE  TOWN  OF  FISHKILL'S  MUNICIPAL
 BOUNDARY WITH THE TOWN OF WAPPINGER AND THE TOWN OF FISHKILL'S MUNICIPAL
 BOUNDARY  WITH  THE CITY OF BEACON, AND THE TOWN OF FISHKILL'S MUNICIPAL
 BOUNDARY WITH THE TOWN OF PHILIPSTOWN,  COUNTY  OF  DUTCHESS,  SHALL  BE
 DESIGNATED  AND  KNOWN AS THE "PRIVATE SIDNEY A. SCOFIELD MEMORIAL HIGH-
 WAY".
  ยง 2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the  instal-
 lation  and  maintenance of adequate signing of the state highway system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this  act.  However,  to  avoid
 confusion  and  to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the desig-
 nation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall  be  one  of
 ceremonial  nature  and  the  official name of such highway shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08952-01-3