# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Corporal Derick Franklin Brinckerhoff Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** S4897A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Rolison
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S4897A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4897A)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system in the town of Fishkill, Dutchess county as the "Corporal Derick Franklin Brinckerhoff Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4897
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ROLISON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "Corporal Derick Franklin Brinckerhoff
  Memorial Highway"

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 345-b to
 read as follows:
  ยง  345-B.  PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "CORPORAL DERICK  FRANKLIN  BRINCKERHOFF  MEMORIAL  HIGHWAY".  ALL  THAT
 PORTION  OF THE STATE ROUTE EIGHTY-TWO BETWEEN ROUTE EIGHTY-TWO'S SOUTH-
 ERN END AT THE NEW YORK STATE ROUTE FIFTY-TWO AND THE TOWN OF FISHKILL'S
 MUNICIPAL BOUNDARY WITH THE TOWN OF WAPPINGER, COUNTY OF DUTCHESS, SHALL
 BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS THE "CORPORAL  DERICK  FRANKLIN  BRINCKERHOFF
 MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".
  ยง  2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the instal-
 lation and maintenance of adequate signing of the state  highway  system
 as  designated  pursuant  to section one of this act.  However, to avoid
 confusion and to limit any possible disruption of commerce,  the  desig-
 nation  called  for  pursuant to section one of this act shall be one of
 ceremonial nature and the official name of such  highway  shall  not  be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08941-01-3