# Prohibits the sale of a firearm, rifle, shotgun or ammunition on state property

**Bill ID:** S4911
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Luis R. Sepúlveda
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4911 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4911)

## Summary

Prohibits the sale of a firearm, rifle, shotgun or ammunition on state property including state and county fairgrounds, and county, city and municipal property; designates offense as a class A misdemeanor.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4911
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. SEPULVEDA -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN  ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to prohibiting the sale of a
  firearm, rifle, shotgun or ammunition on state property
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 265.67 to
 read as follows:
 § 265.67 UNLAWFUL SALE OF A FIREARM, RIFLE,  SHOTGUN  OR  AMMUNITION  ON
  STATE PROPERTY.
  1.  FOR  THE  PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION THE TERM "STATE PROPERTY" SHALL
 MEAN ALL PROPERTY OWNED BY THE STATE AND SHALL INCLUDE:
  (A) ALL COUNTY, CITY AND MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; AND
  (B) ANY FAIRGROUND LOCATED ON STATE, COUNTY, CITY OR MUNICIPAL PROPER-
 TY.
  2. IT SHALL BE UNLAWFUL FOR ANY STATE OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE,  OR  OPERA-
 TOR, LESSEE, OR LICENSEE OF ANY STATE PROPERTY, TO CONTRACT FOR, AUTHOR-
 IZE,  OR  ALLOW THE SALE OF ANY FIREARM, RIFLE, SHOTGUN OR AMMUNITION ON
 STATE PROPERTY OR IN THE BUILDINGS THAT SIT ON STATE PROPERTY OR PROPER-
 TY OTHERWISE OWNED, LEASED, OCCUPIED, OR OPERATED BY THE STATE.
  3. THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO ANY OF THE FOLLOWING:
  (A) A GUN BUYBACK EVENT HELD BY A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.
  (B) THE SALE OF A FIREARM OR AMMUNITION ON STATE PROPERTY THAT  OCCURS
 PURSUANT  TO  A CONTRACT THAT WAS ENTERED INTO BEFORE JANUARY FIRST, TWO
 THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR.
  (C) THE PURCHASE OF A FIREARM, RIFLE, SHOTGUN OR AMMUNITION  ON  STATE
 PROPERTY  BY  A  LAW  ENFORCEMENT  AGENCY  IN  THE COURSE OF ITS REGULAR
 DUTIES.
  UNLAWFUL SALE OF A FIREARM, RIFLE,  SHOTGUN  OR  AMMUNITION  ON  STATE
 PROPERTY IS A CLASS A MISDEMEANOR.
  §  2.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09331-01-3