# Relates to membership warehouse stores

**Bill ID:** S4926
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Luis R. Sepúlveda
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4926 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4926)

## Summary

Prohibits membership warehouse stores from selling to a retailer.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4926
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. SEPULVEDA -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Investigations and Govern-
  ment Operations
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  alcoholic  beverage control law, in relation to
  membership warehouse stores
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Subdivision  20-a  of section 3 of the alcoholic beverage
 control law is renumbered subdivision 20-h and a new subdivision 20-a is
 added to read as follows:
  20-A. "MEMBERSHIP WAREHOUSE RETAILER" MEANS  AND  INCLUDES  ANY  STORE
 PRIMARILY  ENGAGED  IN  THE  RETAIL SALE OF A GENERAL LINE OF GROCERIES,
 WHICH MAY INCLUDE APPAREL, FURNITURE AND APPLIANCES WHICH LIMITS  ACCESS
 TO  MEMBERS  OF  THE  CLUB  INCLUDING BUSINESSES AND INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE
 SUBJECT TO PAY A FEE OR PREMIUM TO SHOP IN THE CLUB.
  § 2. Section 100 of the alcoholic beverage control law is  amended  by
 adding a new subdivision 2-c to read as follows:
  2-C.  (A)  NO  MEMBERSHIP  WAREHOUSE RETAILER SHALL SELL, OR KNOWINGLY
 AGREE TO SELL, OR SELL BY OMISSION, ANY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TO A RETAILER
 WHO PRESENTS A CORPORATE OR BUSINESS, DEBIT, CREDIT, OR MEMBERSHIP  CARD
 BEARING THE NAME OF A RETAILER AT THE POINT OF SALE. THE FIRST VIOLATION
 OF  THIS  SUBDIVISION  SHALL RESULT IN A WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND
 WARNING FROM THE LIQUOR AUTHORITY. A SECOND VIOLATION OF  THIS  SUBDIVI-
 SION  SHALL  RESULT  IN  A  SUSPENSION AND IMPOSITION OF A CIVIL PENALTY
 PURSUANT TO SECTION ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTEEN  OF  THIS  ARTICLE.  A  THIRD
 VIOLATION OF THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL RESULT IN A REVOCATION, OR CANCELLA-
 TION  OF  A  LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PURSUANT TO SECTION ONE
 HUNDRED EIGHTEEN OF THIS ARTICLE.
  (B) THE ACCEPTANCE BY A MEMBERSHIP WAREHOUSE RETAILER OF  A  CORPORATE
 OR BUSINESS, DEBIT, CREDIT, OR MEMBERSHIP CARD THAT HAS SUFFICIENT INDI-
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06402-01-3
 S. 4926  2
 
 CIA OF AN ASSOCIATION WITH A RETAILER IS A WILLFUL INTENT TO VIOLATE THE
 LAW WITHIN THIS SUBDIVISION.
  § 3. This act shall take effect immediately.