# Establishes a student activity fee to fund the student assembly of the state university of New York

**Bill ID:** S4958
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Jackson
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4958 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4958)

## Summary

Establishes a student activity fee to fund the student assembly of the state university of New York.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4958
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sens. JACKSON, CLEARE, KRUEGER, SKOUFIS -- read twice and
  ordered printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee  on
  Higher Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to establishing a student
  activity  fee  to fund the student assembly of the state university of
  New York

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 355-f
 to read as follows:
  ยง 355-F. STUDENT ACTIVITY FEE. 1. THERE SHALL BE ASSESSED A FEE OF  NO
 LESS  THAN ONE DOLLAR PER SEMESTER TO EACH ENROLLED STUDENT AT A COLLEGE
 OR INSTITUTION OF THE STATE UNIVERSITY.
  2. SUCH FEE SHALL BE WHOLLY THE PROPERTY OF THE  STUDENT  ASSEMBLY  OF
 THE  STATE  UNIVERSITY. NO INSTITUTION OR PERSONS OTHER THAN THE STUDENT
 ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE UNIVERSITY SHALL BE ENTITLED TO ANY  APPORTIONMENT
 OF SUCH STUDENT ACTIVITY FEE, NOTWITHSTANDING ANY INCONSISTENT PROVISION
 OF ANY RULE OR LAW.
  3.  THE  REVENUE  GENERATED  BY  SUCH  STUDENT  ACTIVITY  FEE SHALL BE
 UTILIZED AT THE SOLE DISCRETION OF THE STUDENT  ASSEMBLY  OF  THE  STATE
 UNIVERSITY.
  4. THE STUDENT ACTIVITY FEE SHALL BE ASSESSED AND COLLECTED CONCURRENT
 WITH  THE  STANDARD BILL SCHEDULE OF A COLLEGE OR INSTITUTION. EACH SUCH
 COLLEGE OR INSTITUTION SHALL DELIVER THE COLLECTED FEE  TO  THE  STUDENT
 ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE UNIVERSITY WITHIN THIRTY DAYS OF SUCH COLLECTION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07401-01-3