# Relates to hazard duty pay for essential work performed in accordance with a state emergency disaster declaration

**Bill ID:** S4971
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew Gounardes
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4971 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4971)

## Summary

Provides for hazard duty pay of an additional twenty-five hundred dollars for essential work performed in accordance with a state emergency disaster declaration.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4971
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sens. GOUNARDES, BAILEY, JACKSON, MANNION, SANDERS, SKOUF-
  IS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when printed to be committed
  to the Committee on Civil Service and Pensions
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the civil service law, in relation to hazard duty pay
  for essential work performed in  accordance  with  a  state  emergency
  disaster declaration
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 130 of the civil service law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 15 to read as follows:
  15. ESSENTIAL WORKER HAZARD DUTY PAYMENTS  DURING  A  STATE  EMERGENCY
 DISASTER  DECLARATION.  (A)  ANY  STATE  EMPLOYEE  PROVIDING  ESSENTIAL
 SERVICES OR FUNCTIONS  DURING  ANY  STATE  DISASTER  EMERGENCY  DECLARED
 PURSUANT  TO  ARTICLE  TWO-B  OF  THE EXECUTIVE LAW AND DESIGNATED ON OR
 AFTER MARCH FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY AS AN ESSENTIAL  WORKER  PURSUANT
 TO  ANY  LAW,  RULE,  REGULATION  OR  EXECUTIVE ORDER SHALL BE AWARDED A
 HAZARDOUS DUTY PAY DIFFERENTIAL.
  (B) SUCH DIFFERENTIAL SHALL EQUAL TWENTY-FIVE  HUNDRED  DOLLARS.  SUCH
 DIFFERENTIAL  SHALL  BE  IN  ADDITION TO SUCH ESSENTIAL EMPLOYEE'S BASIC
 ANNUAL SALARY, AND SHALL NOT AFFECT OR IMPAIR ANY  PERFORMANCE  ADVANCE-
 MENT PAYMENTS, PERFORMANCE AWARDS, LONGEVITY PAYMENTS OR OTHER RIGHTS OR
 BENEFITS  TO WHICH SUCH EMPLOYEE MAY BE ENTITLED UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF
 THIS CHAPTER; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT ANY DIFFERENTIAL PAYABLE  PURSUANT
 TO  THIS  SUBDIVISION  SHALL  BE INCLUDED AS COMPENSATION FOR RETIREMENT
 PURPOSES. EMPLOYEES ELIGIBLE FOR THE HAZARD DUTY PAYMENTS AUTHORIZED  BY
 THIS  SUBDIVISION  SHALL  ALSO  RECEIVE  THIRTY-FIVE HOURS OF ADDITIONAL
 VACATION TIME ACCRUAL.
  (C) THE DIRECTOR OF THE BUDGET SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS  TO  CARRY  OUT
 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBDIVISION.
  ยง  2.  This  act  shall take effect immediately and shall be deemed to
 have been in full force and effect on and after March 1, 2020.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07853-01-3