# Relates to criminalizing the filming of the commission of a violent felony

**Bill ID:** S4978
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Dean Murray
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S4978 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4978)

## Summary

Criminalizes the video recording of the commission of a violent felony and the conspiracy to record such video.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4978
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. MURRAY, PALUMBO -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to criminalizing the  filming
  of a violent crime
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The penal law is  amended  by  adding  three  new  sections
 235.25, 235.26 and 235.27 to read as follows:
 ยง 235.25 RECORDING  A VIDEO OF THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLENT FELONY; DEFI-
  NITIONS OF TERMS.
  FOR THE PURPOSES OF SECTIONS 235.26 AND 235.27, OF  THIS  ARTICLE  THE
 TERM  "VIOLENT  FELONY"  MEANS ANY OFFENSE DESCRIBED IN SECTION 70.02 OF
 THIS CHAPTER.
 ยง 235.26 RECORDING A VIDEO OF THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLENT FELONY.
  A PERSON IS GUILTY OF RECORDING A VIDEO OF THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLENT
 FELONY WHEN HE OR SHE:
  1. WILFULLY RECORDS A VIDEO OF THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLENT FELONY WITH
 INTENT TO PROMOTE OR ENCOURAGE THE COMMISSION OF THE UNDERLYING  VIOLENT
 FELONY; OR
  2.  CONSPIRES  WITH  ANOTHER  TO RECORD A VIDEO OF THE COMMISSION OF A
 VIOLENT FELONY WITH INTENT TO PROMOTE OR ENCOURAGE THE COMMISSION OF THE
 UNDERLYING VIOLENT FELONY.
  RECORDING A VIDEO OF THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLENT FELONY IS A  CLASS  E
 FELONY.
 ยง 235.27 RECORDING  A VIDEO OF THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLENT FELONY; LIMI-
  TATIONS.
  SUBMISSION OF THE VIDEO DESCRIBED IN SECTION 235.26 OF THIS ARTICLE BY
 THE PERSON RECORDING THE VIDEO TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AT THE  FIRST  REASON-
 ABLE  OPPORTUNITY  MAY  BE CONSIDERED AS EVIDENCE THAT THE PERSON LACKED
 THE INTENT TO PROMOTE OR ENCOURAGE  THE  COMMISSION  OF  THE  UNDERLYING
 VIOLENT FELONY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the first of November next succeed-
 ing the date on which it shall have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09303-01-3