# Relates to exempting the Smith Opera house from licensing restrictions prohibiting manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers of alcoholic beverages from sharing an interest in a licensed premises

**Bill ID:** S4999BA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pamela Helming
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S4999BA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S4999BA)

## Summary

Exempts certain parcels of land containing the Smith Opera House from licensing restrictions prohibiting manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers of alcoholic beverages from sharing an interest in a licensed premises.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  4999--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 21, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. HELMING -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Investigations and Govern-
  ment Operations -- recommitted to the Committee on Investigations  and
  Government  Operations  in  accordance  with  Senate Rule 6, sec. 8 --
  committee discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as  amended  and
  recommitted to said committee
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  alcoholic  beverage control law, in relation to
  exempting certain parcels of land from licensing restrictions  prohib-
  iting  manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers of alcoholic beverages
  from sharing an interest in a licensed premises
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Paragraph (a) of subdivision 1 of section 101 of the alco-
 holic beverage control law is  amended  by  adding  a  new  subparagraph
 (xvii) to read as follows:
  (XVII)  ALL THAT CERTAIN LOT, PIECE OR PARCEL OF LAND, WITH THE BUILD-
 INGS AND IMPROVEMENTS THEREON ERECTED, SITUATE, LYING AND BEING  ON  THE
 NORTHERLY SIDE OF SENECA STREET IN THE CITY OF GENEVA, COUNTY OF ONTARIO
 AND  STATE  OF  NEW  YORK,  MORE  PARTICULARLY  BOUNDED AND DESCRIBED AS
 FOLLOWS:
  PARCEL 1
 BEGINNING AT A POINT IN THE NORTHERLY LINE OF  SAID  SENECA  STREET  AND
 DISTANT  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTEEN  AND  FIVE-TENTHS (118.5) FEET WESTERLY,
 MEASURED ALONG SAID NORTHERLY LINE OF SENECA STREET, FROM  THE  WESTERLY
 LINE  OF  LINDEN STREET, AS AT PRESENT MONUMENTED BY THE CITY OF GENEVA;
 THENCE RUNNING (1) NORTHERLY AT AN ANGLE IN THE  NORTHWEST  QUADRANT  OF
 NINETY  (90)  DEGREES,  SIXTEEN  (16) MINUTES WITH THE NORTHERLY LINE OF
 SENECA STREET A DISTANCE  OF  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETY-TWO  AND  FIVE-TENTHS
 (192.5)  FEET,  MORE  OR  LESS,  TO A POINT IN THE OLD LINE FENCE, WHICH
 POINT IS THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER OF THE PREMISES;  THENCE  RUNNING  (2)
 WESTERLY ALONG SAID OLD LINE FENCE AT AN ANGLE IN THE NORTHWEST QUADRANT
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08002-05-3
 S. 4999--A  2
 
 OF  EIGHTY-FIVE (85) DEGREES, FIFTY-TWO (52) MINUTES WITH THE LINE FENCE
 HEREIN DESCRIBED A DISTANCE OF SEVENTY-EIGHT AND TWO-TENTHS (78.2)  FEET
 TO  A  POINT;  THENCE RUNNING (3) NORTHERLY AT AN ANGLE IN THE NORTHEAST
 QUADRANT  OF  NINETY-FOUR  (94)  DEGREES, FOUR (4) MINUTES WITH THE LAST
 DESCRIBED COURSE AND ALONG A JOG IN SAID FENCE A DISTANCE OF  THREE  AND
 FIVE-TENTHS  (3.5)  FEET,  MORE  OR LESS, TO A POINT; THENCE RUNNING (4)
 WESTERLY AND CONTINUING ALONG SAID OLD FENCE LINE A DISTANCE  OF  ELEVEN
 AND  FIVE-TENTHS  (11.5)  FEET, MORE OR LESS, TO A POINT, WHICH POINT IS
 THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF THE PREMISES, AND RUNNING THENCE (5) IN A SOUTH-
 ERLY DIRECTION A DISTANCE OF TWO HUNDRED TWO (202) FEET, MORE  OR  LESS,
 TO  THE  NORTHERLY  LINE OF SAID SENECA STREET, AS NOW MONUMENTED, WHICH
 POINT IS THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF THE PREMISES, AND  RUNNING  THENCE  (6)
 ALONG THE NORTHERLY LINE OF SAID SENECA STREET A DISTANCE OF EIGHTY-NINE
 AND SEVEN-TENTHS (89.7) FEET TO THE POINT OR PLACE OF BEGINNING.
 PARCEL 2
 ALL  THAT  CERTAIN  LOT,  PIECE OR PARCEL OF LAND SITUATE IN THE CITY OF
 GENEVA, COUNTY OF ONTARIO AND  STATE  OF  NEW  YORK,  MORE  PARTICULARLY
 BOUNDED AND DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
 COMMENCING AT A POINT IN THE EAST LINE OF LANDS OF AGNES DEMPSEY DOXSEE,
 SAID  POINT  BEING  ONE FOOT SOUTH OF THE SOUTH WALL OF THE PRESENT BARN
 NOW ON SAID LAND, AND RUNNING THENCE SOUTHERLY  ABOUT  TWENTY-NINE  (29)
 FEET,  MORE  OR  LESS, TO THE NORTH LINE OF THE LANDS OF THE S-G THEATRE
 CORPORATION; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE LAND OF THE S-G
 CORPORATION THIRTY-THREE (33) FEET TO  A  POINT;  THENCE  NORTHERLY  AND
 PARALLEL WITH THE FIRST COURSE HEREOF AND ALONG THE WESTERLY LINE OF THE
 LANDS  OF  AGNES DEMPSEY DOXSEE TO A POINT; WHICH POINT IF MEASURED IN A
 STRAIGHT LINE EAST AND WEST WOULD BE ONE (1) FOOT  SOUTH  OF  THE  SOUTH
 LINE  OF THE PRESENT BARN; THENCE EASTERLY THIRTY-THREE (33) FEET TO THE
 PLACE OF BEGINNING.
 BEING THE SAME PREMISES SHOWN ON A MAP OF A SURVEY PREPARED  BY  WILLIAM
 J.  NEWTON, L.S. DATED JANUARY 15, 1975 (SURVEY NO. 74-202-C) FILED IN
 THE ONTARIO COUNTY CLERK'S OFFICE.
  § 2. Paragraph (a) of subdivision 13 of section 106 of  the  alcoholic
 beverage  control  law  is amended by adding a new subparagraph (xix) to
 read as follows:
  (XIX) ALL THAT TRACT  OR  PARCEL  OF  LAND,  WITH  THE  BUILDINGS  AND
 IMPROVEMENTS  THEREON  ERECTED,  SITUATE, LYING AND BEING ON COUNTY ROAD
 153 IN MILITARY LOT 14 & 23 IN THE TOWN OF OVID, COUNTY OF SENECA, STATE
 OF NEW YORK BOUNDED AND DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
  BEGINNING AT A POINT IN THE ASSUMED CENTERLINE OF COUNTY ROAD  153  AT
 THE  APPARENT CENTER OF THE BRIDGE OVER SHELDRAKE CREEK, SAID POINT ALSO
 BEING SOUTHERLY A DISTANCE OF 292 FEET MORE OR LESS  FROM  THE  APPARENT
 INTERSECTION OF SAID CENTERLINE WITH THE ASSUMED CENTERLINE OF SHELDRAKE
 ROAD; THENCE LEAVING THE POINT OF BEGINNING SOUTH 18° 21' 25" EAST ALONG
 THE ASSUMED CENTERLINE OF COUNTY ROAD 153 A DISTANCE OF 260.70 FEET TO A
 POINT; THENCE SOUTH 19° 47' 57" EAST ALONG SAID CENTERLINE A DISTANCE OF
 107.76 FEET TO A POINT; THENCE SOUTH 21° 16' 18" EAST ALONG SAID CENTER-
 LINE A DISTANCE OF 182.94 FEET TO A POINT; THENCE NORTH 73° 21' 51" EAST
 ALONG  LANDS REPUTEDLY OF ATWOOD (LIB. 385, PAGE 398) PASSING THROUGH AN
 IRON PIPE 17.91 FEET DISTANT, AND CONTINUING  FURTHER  ALONG  THAT  SAME
 COURSE  A DISTANCE OF 80.43 FEET FARTHER, THE TOTAL DISTANCE BEING 98.34
 FEET TO AN IRON PIPE IN CONCRETE AT OR NEAR THE  SHORE  LINE  OF  CAYUGA
 LAKE;  THENCE  IN  A  SOUTHERLY  DIRECTION  THE  FOLLOWING  COURSES  AND
 DISTANCES ALONG TIE LINES AT OR NEAR THE  SHORE  LINE  OF  CAYUGA  LAKE:
 SOUTH 03° 51' 47" WEST A DISTANCE OF 91.67 FEET TO A POINT; THENCE SOUTH
 09°  41'  08" EAST A DISTANCE OF 60.89 FEET TO A POINT; THENCE SOUTH 25°
 S. 4999--A  3

 12' 40" EAST A DISTANCE OF 86.20 FEET TO AN IRON PIN; THENCE  SOUTH  68°
 29'  53" WEST ALONG LANDS REPUTEDLY OF BOYLE (LIB. 397, PAGE 1128) PASS-
 ING THROUGH AN IRON PIN 35.00 FEET DISTANT, AND CONTINUING FURTHER ALONG
 THAT  SAME  COURSE  PASSING THROUGH ANOTHER IRON PIN 40.00 FEET FARTHER,
 AND CONTINUING STILL FURTHER ALONG THAT SAME COURSE A DISTANCE OF 149.00
 FEET FARTHER, THE TOTAL DISTANCE BEING  224.00  FEET  TO  AN  IRON  PIN;
 THENCE SOUTH 17° 34' 07" EAST ALONG SAID LANDS OF BOYLE, PASSING THROUGH
 A  CONCRETE  POST 170.00 FEET DISTANT, AND CONTINUING FURTHER ALONG THAT
 SAME COURSE ALONG LANDS REPUTEDLY OF RIEMENSCHNEIDER (LIB. 449, PAGE 61)
 A DISTANCE OF 159.70 FEET FARTHER, THE TOTAL DISTANCE BEING 329.70  FEET
 TO  AN  IRON PIN; THENCE SOUTH 75° 00' 23" WEST ALONG LANDS REPUTEDLY OF
 DIAMOND-CAREY (LIB. 430, PAGE 271) A DISTANCE OF 250.00 FEET TO AN  IRON
 PIN;  THENCE  SOUTH 62° 21' 07" WEST ALONG SAID LANDS OF DIAMOND-CAREY A
 DISTANCE OF 168.29 FEET TO AN IRON PIPE 2 FEET EAST OF A 12 INCH HICKORY
 TREE; THENCE SOUTH 01° 32' 47" WEST ALONG SAID LANDS OF DIAMOND-CAREY  A
 DISTANCE  OF  377.63  FEET TO AN IRON PIN; THENCE NORTH 72° 01' 46" EAST
 ALONG SAID LANDS OF DIAMOND-CAREY A DISTANCE OF 17.49 FEET  TO  AN  IRON
 PIN;  THENCE  SOUTH 13° 10' 51" EAST ALONG LANDS REPUTEDLY OF POES (LIB.
 533, PAGE 327) A DISTANCE OF 174.57 FEET TO AN IRON  PIN;  THENCE  SOUTH
 61°  15'  35" WEST ALONG LANDS REPUTEDLY OF DIAMOND, HELFMAN & DAY (LIB.
 482, PAGE 354) A DISTANCE OF 44.90 FEET TO AN IRON  PIPE;  THENCE  SOUTH
 23°  58'  18"  EAST  ALONG SAID LANDS OF DIAMOND, HELFMAN & DAY AND ALSO
 ALONG LANDS REPUTEDLY OF DAY (LIB. 317, PAGE 341) A DISTANCE  OF  197.28
 FEET  TO AN AXLE; THENCE SOUTH 03° 33' 43" EAST ALONG LANDS REPUTEDLY OF
 DUSINBERE (LIB. 510, PAGE 151) A DISTANCE OF 76.42 FEET TO AN IRON PIPE;
 THENCE SOUTH 04° 24' 03" EAST ALONG SAID  LANDS  OF  DUSINBERE,  PASSING
 THROUGH  AN  IRON PIPE 102.31 FEET DISTANT, AND CONTINUING FURTHER ALONG
 THAT SAME COURSE ALONG LANDS REPUTEDLY OF FRANTZ (LIB. 432, PAGE  69)  A
 DISTANCE OF 238.42 FEET FARTHER, THE TOTAL DISTANCE BEING 340.73 FEET TO
 AN  IRON  PIN;  THENCE  SOUTH  05° 1 T 20" EAST ALONG LANDS REPUTEDLY OF
 HOLMAN (LIB. 331, PAGE 398) A DISTANCE OF 199.65 FEET TO AN  IRON  PIPE;
 THENCE NORTH 85° 47' 17" WEST ALONG LANDS REPUTEDLY OF TRAVIS (LIB. 413,
 PAGE  61) A DISTANCE OF 60.22 FEET TO AN IRON PIPE; THENCE SOUTH 49° 37'
 13" WEST ALONG SAID LANDS OF TRAVIS A DISTANCE OF 136.80 FEET TO AN IRON
 PIPE; THENCE SOUTH 52° 29'  03"  WEST  ALONG  SAID  LANDS  OF  TRAVIS  A
 DISTANCE  OF 201.20 FEET TO A POINT; THENCE SOUTH 67° 02' 08" WEST ALONG
 SAID LANDS OF TRAVIS A DISTANCE OF 203.75 FEET TO AN  IRON  PIN;  THENCE
 SOUTH  05°  58' 13" WEST A DISTANCE OF 25.95 FEET TO A POINT IN A DOUBLE
 BASSWOOD STUMP; THENCE NORTH 84° 57' 23" WEST ALONG LANDS  REPUTEDLY  OF
 TRAVIS  (LIB.  413, PAGE 61) A DISTANCE OF 643.08 FEET TO AN IRON PIPE;
 THENCE NORTH 85° 19' 03" WEST ALONG  LANDS  REPUTEDLY  OF  GEORGE  (LIB.
 501,  PAGE  283) A DISTANCE OF 2953.18 FEET TO AN IRON PIN; THENCE NORTH
 85° 01' 43" WEST A DISTANCE OF 260.88 FEET TO AN IRON  PIN;  THENCE  THE
 FOLLOWING  COURSES  AND  DISTANCES ALONG TIE LINES BEING ALONG THE SOUTH
 BANK OF SHELDRAKE CREEK: NORTH 04° 58' 17" EAST A DISTANCE OF 75.00 FEET
 TO A POINT; NORTH 53° 32' 03" EAST A DISTANCE OF 257.36 FEET TO A POINT;
 NORTH 49° 46' 21" EAST A DISTANCE OF 388.42 FEET TO A POINT;  NORTH  70°
 07'  21"  EAST  A  DISTANCE OF 113.39 FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 85° 22' 45"
 EAST A DISTANCE OF 158.74 FEET TO A POINT; SOUTH  75°  38'  53"  EAST  A
 DISTANCE OF 138.69 FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 75° 27' 23" EAST A DISTANCE OF
 123.03 FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 01° 49' 54" WEST A DISTANCE OF 286.17 FEET
 TO A POINT; NORTH 45° 15' 53" EAST A DISTANCE OF 124.41 FEET TO A POINT;
 SOUTH  74°  36' 39" EAST A DISTANCE OF 235.69 FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 76°
 37' 59" EAST A DISTANCE OF 203.07 FEET TO A POINT;  NORTH  44°  08'  15"
 EAST  A  DISTANCE  OF  225.05  FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 32° 19' 26" EAST A
 DISTANCE OF 175.45 FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 87° 20' 19" EAST A DISTANCE OF
 S. 4999--A  4
 
 266.75 FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 50° 26' 38" EAST A DISTANCE OF 286.68 FEET
 TO A POINT; NORTH 69° 39' 24" EAST A DISTANCE OF 218.  09  FEE  T  TO  A
 POINT;  NORTH  34°  09'  56"  EAST A DISTANCE OF 183.80 FEET TO A POINT;
 NORTH  06°  30' 06" EAST A DISTANCE OF 173.73 FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 82°
 28' 34" EAST A DISTANCE OF 318.45 FEET TO A POINT;  NORTH  63°  12'  37"
 EAST  A  DISTANCE  OF  457.87  FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 47° 33' 36" EAST A
 DISTANCE OF 228.07 FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 60° 11* 17" EAST A DISTANCE OF
 263.17 FEET TO A POINT; NORTH 71° 05' 04" EAST A DISTANCE OF 179.45 FEET
 TO A POINT; NORTH 81° 35' 05" EAST A DISTANCE OF 337.03 FEET TO A POINT;
 NORTH 76° 08' 39" EAST A DISTANCE OF 164.59  FEET  TO  A  POINT;  THENCE
 NORTH  21°  30'  07"  WEST  A  DISTANCE  OF 56.80 FEET TO A POINT IN THE
 ASSUMED CENTERLINE OF SHELDRAKE CREEK; THENCE NORTH  64°  26'  00"  EAST
 ALONG SAID CENTERLINE A DISTANCE OF 140.00 FEET TO A POINT; THENCE NORTH
 38°  10'  00"  EAST ALONG SAID CENTERLINE A DISTANCE OF 150.00 FEET TO A
 POINT, SAID POINT BEING THE POINT AND PLACE OF BEGINNING.  COMPRISING AN
 AREA OF 155.081 ACRES OF LAND ACCORDING TO A SURVEY COMPLETED BY MICHAEL
 D. KARLSEN ON DECEMBER 20, 1996 ENTITLED "PLAN OF LAND TO BE CONVEYED BY
 SEYMOUR DIAMOND" KNOWN AS JOB NUMBER 96-572-2 AND A SURVEY COMPLETED  BY
 MICHAEL  D.  KARLSEN ON DECEMBER 9, 1996 ENTITLED "PLAN SHOWING EASTERLY
 LINES OF SEYMOUR DIAMOND" KNOWN AS JOB NUMBER 96-572-1.  SAID  MAPS  ARE
 FILED  IN  THE  SENECA COUNTY CLERK'S OFFICE IN MAP BOOK 97 PAGES 38 AND
 39.
  ALSO QUIT CLAIMING ALL RIGHT, TITLE AND INTEREST IN AND  TO  THE  LAND
 LYING  BETWEEN  THE  CENTERLINE OF SHELDRAKE CREEK AND THE SOUTH BANK OF
 SAID SHELDRAKE CREEK.
  SUBJECT TO A RIGHT OF WAY CONVEYED TO NEW YORK STATE ELECTRIC AND  GAS
 CORPORATION BY INSTRUMENT DATED JUNE 14, 1945 AND RECORDED IN THE SENECA
 COUNTY CLERK'S OFFICE IN LIBER 186 OF DEEDS AT PAGE 454.
  SUBJECT TO THE RIGHTS OF THE PUBLIC IN AND TO COUNTY ROAD 153.
  SUBJECT  TO  A  PERMANENT RIGHT OF WAY AND EASEMENT FOR INGRESS TO AND
 EGRESS FROM THE SPRING ON THE PREMISES HEREIN CONVEYED ACROSS THE  PREM-
 ISES  HEREIN  CONVEYED  TO THE PREMISED HEREIN EXCEPTED AND RESERVED FOR
 PURPOSES OF THE INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR  OF  A  WATER  PIPE
 LINE  RUNNING  FROM  THE  SAID  SPRING TO THE SAID PREMISES EXCEPTED AND
 RESERVED WHICH SAID PIPE LINE SHALL BE USED FOR  PURPOSES  OF  SUPPLYING
 WATER  FROM  SAID  SPRING  TO SAID RESERVED PREMISES FOR RESIDENTIAL AND
 ALLIED USES (LIBER 397, PAGE 1128).
  SUBJECT TO THE RIGHT TO USE WATER FROM A CERTAIN  SPRING  SITUATED  ON
 THE  PREMISES HEREIN CONVEYED, SAID WATER FROM SAID SPRING TO BE USED TO
 SUPPLY THE DWELLING HOUSE IDENTIFIED IN LIBER 449 OF DEEDS  AT  PAGE  61
 ONLY  AND  SAID  WATER  TO BE PIPED TO THE SAID HOUSE AS THE SAME IS NOW
 PIPED AND NO LARGER PIPES TO BE INSTALLED AT ANY TIME,  FOR  SUCH  WATER
 SUPPLY,  TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO GO UPON THE PREMISES HEREIN CONVEYED
 FOR THE PURPOSE OF REPAIRING AND RENEWING SAID PIPES.
  TOGETHER WITH ALL OF THE RIGHT, TITLE AND INTEREST OF THE  GRANTOR  IN
 AND  TO ANY LANDS OR WATERS THAT MAY LIE BETWEEN HIGH AND LOW WATER MARK
 OF CAYUGA LAKE AND IMMEDIATELY TO THE EAST OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED  PREM-
 ISES  AND  BETWEEN THE NORTH AND SOUTH LINE OF SAID PREMISES PRODUCED IN
 AN EASTERLY DIRECTION; IT BEING UNDERSTOOD BETWEEN  THE  PARTIES  HERETO
 THAT ALL THE PREMISES CONVEYED HEREIN WHICH TEND TO CONVEY ANY RIGHTS IN
 AND  TO CAYUGA LAKE ARE SUBJECT TO ALL LAWFUL RIGHTS OF THE STATE OF NEW
 YORK AND TO LAWFUL USAGE DURING TIMES OF HIGH WATER.
  TOGETHER WITH A 20-FOOT RIGHT OF WAY FROM LAKE ROAD  OVER  AND  ACROSS
 PREMISES NOW OR FORMERLY OF DUSINBERE (510/151), SUBJECT TO THE RIGHT OF
 DUSINBERE, THEIR HEIRS, DISTRIBUTEES AND ASSIGNS, TO RELOCATE SAID RIGHT
 OF WAY AT ANY TIME HEREAFTER.
 S. 4999--A  5

  BEING AND INTENDING THE SAME PREMISES WHICH WERE CONVEYED TO THE PARTY
 OF  THE  FIRST  PART  HEREIN  BY  WARRANT DEED OF SEYMOUR DIAMOND, DATED
 FEBRUARY 6, 1997 AND RECORDED IN THE SENECA  COUNTY  CLERK'S  OFFICE  ON
 FEBRUARY 6, 1997 IN LIBER 550 OF DEEDS AT PAGE 243.
  ALSO  ALL  THAT  TRACT  OR PARCEL OF LAND SITUATE IN THE TOWN OF OVID,
 SENECA COUNTY, NEW YORK BEING A PART OF LOT NO. 23 IN SAID TOWN AND MORE
 PARTICULARLY BOUNDED AND DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
  BEGINNING AT A POINT IN THE CENTER LINE OF COUNTY ROAD NO.  153,  SAID
 POINT BEING LOCATED SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID CENTER LINE A DISTANCE OF 1,080
 FEET  FROM  ITS  INTERSECTION  WITH  THE  CENTER LINE OF SHELDRAKE ROAD;
 THENCE NORTH 68° 29' 53' EAST, SAID COURSE PASSING THROUGH A FOUND ON AT
 14.64 FEET A TOTAL DISTANCE OF 49.64 FEET TO A FOUND  PIN  IN  THE  HIGH
 WATER  MARK  OF  CAYUGA  LAKE; THENCE SOUTHEASTERLY ALONG THE HIGH WATER
 LINE OF CAYUGA LAKE A DISTANCE OF 174 FEET, SAID COURSE HAVING  A  CHORD
 TIE OF SOUTH 32° 06' 16" EAST AND A CHORD TIE DISTANCE OF 172.91 FEET TO
 A  POINT  AT  THE  HIGH  WATER MARK; THENCE SOUTH 68° 29' 53" WEST, SAID
 COURSE PASSING THROUGH A FOUND IRON BAR IN THE EASTERLY RIGHT OF WAY  OF
 COUNTY  ROAD NO. 153 AT 53.85 FEET AND CONTINUING ACROSS COUNTY ROAD NO.
 153 AND PASSING THROUGH A FOUND IRON BAR IN THE WEST LINE OF COUNTY ROAD
 NO.  153 AT 103.60 FEET A TOTAL DISTANCE  OF  267.50  FEET  TO  A  FOUND
 CONCRETE  MONUMENT;  THENCE  NORTH 13° 34' 07" WEST A DISTANCE OF 170.35
 FEET TO A FOUND PIN; THENCE NORTH 68° 29' 53" EAST, SAID COURSE  PASSING
 THROUGH  A  FOUND  PIN  NEAR THE WEST LINE OF COUNTY ROAD NO. 153 AT 149
 FEET A TOTAL DISTANCE OF 174.36 FEET TO THE POINT OR PLACE OF BEGINNING,
 CONTAINING 0.77 ACRE OF LAND, MORE OR LESS.
  THE ABOVE DESCRIBED PREMISES ARE AS SHOWN ON A SURVEY ENTITLED "SURVEY
 MAP SHOWING LANDS OF JUDITH BOYLE NO. 7488 COUNTY ROAD NO.  153  -  MIL.
 LOT  14  TOWN  OF OVID, SENECA COUNTY, NEW YORK" DATED APRIL 24, 1998 AS
 PREPARED BY T.G. MILLER P.C., ENGINEERS AND SURVEYORS. SAID MAP IS FILED
 IN THE SENECA COUNTY CLERK'S OFFICE IN MAP BOOK 98 PAGE 159.
  BEING THE SAME PREMISES CONVEYED TO THE  GRANTOR  HEREIN  BY  DEED  OF
 JUDITH  BOYLE  DATED JUNE 3, 1998, RECORDED IN THE SENECA COUNTY CLERK'S
 OFFICE ON JUNE 26, 1998 IN LIBER 573 OF DEEDS AT PAGE 37.
  THIS CONVEYANCE IS MADE SUBJECT TO THE FOLLOWING:
  1. THE RIGHTS OF THE PUBLIC IN AND TO COUNTY ROAD NO. 153.
  2. ANY AND ALL EASEMENTS OR RIGHTS OF WAY OF RECORD.
  TOGETHER WITH THE APPURTENANCES AND ALL THE ESTATE AND RIGHTS  OF  THE
 PARTY OF THE FIRST PART IN AND TO SAID PREMISES.
  § 3. This act shall take effect immediately.