# Provides for notification to hospital patients upon intake of reports of hospital-acquired infections

**Bill ID:** S5047
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew J. Lanza
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5047 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5047)

## Summary

Provides for notification to hospital patients upon intake of reports of hospital-acquired infections.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5047
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 22, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  LANZA  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to notifying hospital
  patients upon intake of reports of hospital-acquired infections
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Section 2819 of the public health law is amended by adding
 a new subdivision 6-a to read as follows:
  6-A. NO LATER THAN ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY DAYS AFTER THE ISSUANCE  OF  THE
 REPORTS  REQUIRED  PURSUANT  TO  SUBPARAGRAPH  (III) OF PARAGRAPH (C) OF
 SUBDIVISION FIVE  OF  THIS  SECTION,  EACH  GENERAL  HOSPITAL  SHALL  BE
 REQUIRED  TO  NOTIFY  PATIENTS  AS A COMPONENT OF PREBOOKING, INTAKE AND
 REGISTRATION OF THE HOSPITAL-ACQUIRED INFECTIONS, THAT WOULD BE REQUIRED
 TO BE REPORTED TO THE DEPARTMENT PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION, THAT OCCURRED
 IN THE HOSPITAL FOR THE PRIOR THIRTY DAY PERIOD. SUCH NOTIFICATION SHALL
 BE UPDATED ON A DAILY  BASIS  AND  SHALL  BE  ACCOMPLISHED  THROUGH  THE
 CONSPICUOUS  POSTING  OF  SIGNS,  WHICH ARE EASILY UNDERSTANDABLE BY THE
 GENERAL PUBLIC, AND SHALL INCLUDE DIRECTIONS ON HOW TO OBTAIN ADDITIONAL
 INFORMATION. TO THE DEGREE PRACTICABLE, THE FORMAT OF SUCH  SIGNS  SHALL
 BE CONSISTENT WITH THE FORMAT OF THE SUMMARY TABLE REQUIRED TO BE DEVEL-
 OPED  PURSUANT  TO  SUBDIVISION  SIX  OF  THIS SECTION. UPON REQUEST THE
 HOSPITAL SHALL PROVIDE A PATIENT WITH AN INDIVIDUAL COPY OF THE INFORMA-
 TION CONTAINED ON SUCH SIGN. THE  DEPARTMENT  THROUGH  REGULATION  SHALL
 ESTABLISH PENALTIES APPLICABLE TO THE FIRST AND SUBSEQUENT VIOLATIONS OF
 THE REQUIREMENT IMPOSED BY THIS SUBDIVISION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08755-01-3