# Relates to references by a city school district in a city with a population of one million or more to public holidays

**Bill ID:** S5043
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew J. Lanza
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5043 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5043)

## Summary

Relates to references by a city school district in a city with a population of one million or more to public holidays, specifically Columbus Day; provides that any literature or document created and/or distributed by such district do the same including school calendars.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5043
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 22, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  LANZA  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on New York City Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to references by  a  city
  school  district  with  a  population of one million or more to public
  holidays

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The education law is amended by adding a new section 3229
 to read as follows:
  ยง 3229. PUBLIC HOLIDAYS. A CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT OF A CITY WITH A POPU-
 LATION OF ONE MILLION OR  MORE  SHALL  REFER  TO  ALL  PUBLIC  HOLIDAYS,
 INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO COLUMBUS DAY, BY THE DESIGNATED NAME PURSU-
 ANT TO SECTION TWENTY-FOUR OF THE GENERAL CONSTRUCTION LAW.  ANY LITERA-
 TURE OR DOCUMENT CREATED AND/OR DISTRIBUTED BY SUCH CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
 SHALL  REFER  TO SUCH HOLIDAYS IN SUCH MANNER, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
 TO SCHOOL CALENDARS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09770-01-3