# Relates to establishing a sex trafficking awareness and prevention program

**Bill ID:** S5061
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michelle Hinchey
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5061 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5061)

## Summary

Directs the commissioner of DMV to establish a sex trafficking awareness and prevention program to provide education and awareness literature and educational materials to all drivers with a commercial motor vehicle license.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5061
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 22, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. HINCHEY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation to establishing
  a sex trafficking awareness and prevention program
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  vehicle  and  traffic law is amended by adding a new
 section 224-b to read as follows:
  ยง 224-B. SEX TRAFFICKING AWARENESS AND PREVENTION PROGRAM. THE COMMIS-
 SIONER, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE COMMISSIONER OF THE DIVISION OF CRIMINAL
 JUSTICE  SERVICES AND THE COMMISSIONER OF TRANSPORTATION, SHALL  DEVELOP
 A  SEX TRAFFICKING PREVENTION PROGRAM. THE SEX TRAFFICKING AWARENESS AND
 PREVENTION PROGRAM SHALL BE ESTABLISHED FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF  PROVIDING
 EDUCATION  AND  AWARENESS  FOR THE PREVENTION OF SEX TRAFFICKING IN THIS
 STATE. WITHIN AMOUNTS APPROPRIATED, THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE  EDUCATION
 AND AWARENESS LITERATURE AND EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS TO ALL DRIVERS WITH A
 COMMERCIAL  MOTOR  VEHICLE  LICENSE  AS  DEFINED IN SECTION FIVE HUNDRED
 ONE-A OF THIS CHAPTER. THE MATERIALS SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT  BE  LIMITED
 TO,  WARNING  SIGNS  OF POTENTIAL SEX TRAFFICKING AND ENTITIES TO WHOM A
 DRIVER MAY REPORT SUSPECTED ACTIVITY THAT MIGHT CONSTITUTE SEX TRAFFICK-
 ING.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09288-01-3