# Requires motor vehicle dealer franchisors to fully compensate franchised motor vehicle dealers for warranty service agreements

**Bill ID:** S5085CA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Timothy M. Kennedy
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S5085CA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5085CA)

## Summary

Requires motor vehicle dealer franchisors to fully compensate franchised motor vehicle dealers for warranty service agreements.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5085--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 22, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sens. KENNEDY, GALLIVAN, MATTERA, MURRAY, OBERACKER, RAMOS
  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when printed to be committed to
  the Committee on Transportation -- committee discharged, bill amended,
  ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation to requiring
  motor vehicle dealer franchisors to fully compensate franchised  motor
  vehicle dealers for warranty service agreements
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 1 of section 465 of  the  vehicle  and  traffic
 law, as amended by chapter 26 of the laws of 2014, is amended to read as
 follows:
  1.  Every  franchisor  shall  properly  fulfill any warranty agreement
 and/or franchisor's service contract, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED  TO  ALL
 WARRANTY  REPAIRS,  EXTENDED  WARRANTY  REPAIRS,  FACTORY  COMPENSATED
 REPAIRS, RECALLS,  DIAGNOSTICS,  PARTS  AND  OTHER  VOLUNTARY  STOP-SELL
 REPAIRS, and shall compensate each of its franchised motor vehicle deal-
 ers  for  ALL warranty [parts and labor], RECALL, DIAGNOSTIC LABOR OPER-
 ATIONS AND PARTS WHERE APPLICABLE in amounts [which  reflect  reasonable
 compensation  for  such  work]  EQUAL TO THE APPLICABLE LABOR TIME GUIDE
 UTILIZED FOR RETAIL CUSTOMER PAID LABOR OPERATIONS BY A FRANCHISED MOTOR
 VEHICLE DEALER. IN NO EVENT SHALL SUCH COMPENSATION FAIL TO INCLUDE FULL
 COMPENSATION FOR DIAGNOSTIC WORK, AS WELL AS REPAIR SERVICE, LABOR,  AND
 PARTS.  ADDITIONALLY, IF A TECHNICIAN IS REQUIRED TO COMMUNICATE WITH A
 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTER, ENGINEERING OR SOME  EXTERNAL  MANUFACTURER
 SOURCE IN ORDER TO PROVIDE A WARRANTY REPAIR, THE MANUFACTURER SHALL PAY
 FOR  THE  TIME  FROM START OF COMMUNICATIONS (INCLUDING HOLD TIME) UNTIL
 THE COMMUNICATION IS COMPLETE. All warranty claims and/or claims under a
 franchisor's service contract made by franchised motor  vehicle  dealers
 shall be paid within thirty days following their approval. For DIAGNOSIS
 WORK,  parts  reimbursement,  other  than components, systems, fixtures,
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02112-04-3
 S. 5085--A  2
 
 appliances, furnishings, accessories and features of a house coach  that
 are designed, used and maintained primarily for nonvehicular residential
 purposes, and for labor reimbursement, reasonable compensation shall not
 be  less than the price and rate charged by the franchised motor vehicle
 dealer for like services to  non-warranty  and/or  non-service  contract
 customers.  IN  THE  EVENT  THAT A TIME GUIDE HAS NOT BEEN AGREED TO FOR
 WARRANTY REPAIRS, OR SAID TIME GUIDE DOES NOT DEFINE TIME FOR AN  APPLI-
 CABLE WARRANTY REPAIR, THE FRANCHISOR'S TIME GUIDE SHALL BE USED, MULTI-
 PLIED  BY  ONE AND ONE-HALF. For purposes of this section, the price and
 rate charged by the franchised motor vehicle dealer  for  parts  may  be
 established  by  submitting  to  the  franchisor  one hundred sequential
 nonwarranty customer-paid service repair orders or the number of sequen-
 tial nonwarranty customer-paid service repair orders  written  within  a
 ninety day period, whichever is less, covering repairs made no more than
 one  hundred  eighty days before the submission, and declaring the price
 and rate, including average markup  for  the  franchised  motor  vehicle
 dealer  as  its  reimbursement  rate. The reimbursement rate so declared
 shall go into effect thirty days following the declaration and shall  be
 presumed  to be reasonable, however a franchisor may rebut such presump-
 tion by showing that such rate so established is unreasonable  in  light
 of  the  practices  of all other franchised motor vehicle dealers in the
 vicinity offering the same line make. The franchised motor vehicle deal-
 er shall not request a change in the reimbursement rate more often  than
 once  in  each  calendar  year.  In establishing the labor reimbursement
 rate, the franchisor shall not require a franchised motor vehicle dealer
 to establish said rate by a methodology, or  by  requiring  information,
 that  is  unduly burdensome or time consuming to provide, including, but
 not limited to,  a  transaction  by  transaction  calculation.  For  the
 purposes  of this section, the following parts or types of repairs shall
 be  excluded  from  the  parts  and/or  labor  calculations  and  the
 franchisor's  reimbursement  requirements  under this section: (a) parts
 sold at wholesale; (b) tires; (c) routine maintenance not covered  under
 any  retail  customer  warranty  such  as  fluids, filters and belts not
 provided in the course of repairs; (d) vehicle reconditioning;  and  (e)
 batteries  replaced  as  part of a routine maintenance operation. If the
 franchisor rejects the declaration or attempts to rebut the  declaration
 because  of  an  error  in the dealer's submission, the franchisor shall
 identify with specificity the reason  for  rejection  and  identify  the
 error  or  errors  within  the  submission.  In the event the franchisor
 rejects or rebuts the dealer's initial  declaration,  the  dealer  shall
 have  the  opportunity,  within  sixty  days  to  resubmit  the full and
 corrected declaration addressing the alleged error or errors  identified
 by  the  franchisor. The franchisor shall respond within sixty days. The
 one hundred eighty day requirement for the repair orders shall be stayed
 from the date of initial submission. In any action  or  proceeding  held
 pursuant  to  this  subdivision, the franchisor shall have the burden of
 proving that the  rate  declared  by  the  dealer  was  unreasonable  as
 described  in  this  subdivision and that the proposed adjustment of the
 average percentage markup or rejection of the submission  is  reasonable
 pursuant  to  the provisions of this subdivision.  NO DEBIT REDUCTION OR
 CHARGE BACK OF ANY ITEM ON A WARRANTY REPAIR ORDER SHALL BE MADE  ABSENT
 A  FINDING  OF  FRAUD  OR  ILLEGAL ACTIONS BY THE DEALER.  NO FRANCHISOR
 SHALL IMPOSE ANY FORM OF COST RECOVERY  FEES  OR  SURCHARGES  AGAINST  A
 FRANCHISED  MOTOR  VEHICLE  DEALER  FOR PAYMENTS MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
 THIS SUBDIVISION. THERE SHALL BE NO REDUCTION  IN  PAYMENTS  UNDER  THIS
 SUBDIVISION  DUE  TO  PREESTABLISHED  MARKET  NORMS  OR MARKET AVERAGES.
 S. 5085--A  3
 
 FRANCHISORS ARE PROHIBITED FROM ESTABLISHING RESTRICTIONS OR LIMITATIONS
 OF CUSTOMER REPAIR FREQUENCY DUE TO FAILURE  RATE  INDEXES  OR  NATIONAL
 FAILURE  AVERAGES.  A  WARRANTY  CLAIM  TIMELY  MADE SHALL NOT BE DEEMED
 INVALID  SOLELY BECAUSE UNAVAILABLE PARTS CAUSE ADDITIONAL USE AND MILE-
 AGE ON THE VEHICLE.  IF A FRANCHISOR IMPOSES A RECALL OR  STOP  SALE  ON
 ANY  NEW  VEHICLE  IN A FRANCHISED MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER'S INVENTORY THAT
 PREVENTS THE SALE OF THE VEHICLE, THE FRANCHISOR  SHALL  COMPENSATE  THE
 MOTOR  VEHICLE  DEALER FOR ANY INTEREST AND STORAGE UNTIL THE VEHICLE IS
 REPAIRED AND MADE READY FOR SALE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.