# Provides for notice to individuals in pre-trial detention of their right to vote

**Bill ID:** S5098
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5098 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5098)

## Summary

Provides for notice to individuals in pre-trial detention of their right to vote while being arraigned and while awaiting such trial or examination in a local correction facility.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5098
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 22, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the criminal procedure law and the  correction  law,  in
  relation  to  notifying  individuals  in  pre-trial detention of their
  right to vote

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Section 210.15 of the criminal procedure law is amended by
 adding a new subdivision 4 to read as follows:
  4. THE COURT SHALL INFORM THE DEFENDANT, IF SUCH INDIVIDUAL  IS  EIGH-
 TEEN  YEARS  OF  AGE OR OVER, OF HIS OR HER RIGHT TO VOTE WHILE HELD FOR
 PRE-TRIAL DETENTION, IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (B) OF SUBDIVISION ONE
 OF SECTION FIVE HUNDRED-A OF THE CORRECTION LAW, IN A LOCAL CORRECTIONAL
 FACILITY.
  ยง 2. The correction law is amended by adding a new section 511 to read
 as follows:
  ยง 511. NOTICE OF VOTING; PRE-TRIAL DETENTION. ALL  LOCAL  CORRECTIONAL
 FACILITIES SHALL POST INFORMATION REGARDING VOTING ELIGIBILITY FOR INDI-
 VIDUALS  CHARGED  WITH  A CRIME, COMMITTED FOR TRIAL AND EXAMINATION AND
 DETAINED UNTIL SUCH TRIAL AND EXAMINATION OCCURS, IN A  LOCATION  EASILY
 ACCESSIBLE BY ALL SUCH INDIVIDUALS.
  ยง  3.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09688-01-3