# Directs the division of criminal justice services to promulgate safety standards and training requirements for the protection of law enforcement against biological hazards posed by certain persons in custody

**Bill ID:** S5104
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5104 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5104)

## Summary

Directs the division of criminal justice services to promulgate safety standards and training requirements for the protection of law enforcement staff against biological hazards posed by spitting of persons in custody.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5104
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 22, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law, in relation to directing the division
  of criminal justice services to promulgate safety standards and train-
  ing requirements for the protection of law enforcement  staff  against
  the biological hazards posed by certain persons in custody
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 837 of the executive law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 24 to read as follows:
  24. PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS  FOR  SAFETY  STANDARDS  FOR  THE
 PROTECTION OF LAW ENFORCEMENT STAFF AGAINST THE BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS POSED
 BY  SPITTING  OF  PERSONS IN CUSTODY. SUCH REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS MAY
 INCLUDE THE PURCHASE OF SAFETY EQUIPMENT,  BUT  SHALL  NOT  INCLUDE  THE
 PURCHASE  OR  USE OF A SPIT HOOD, SPIT MASK, SPIT COVERING, SPIT CAP, OR
 ANY DEVICE THAT COMPLETELY COVERS  THE  FACE  OF  THE  INDIVIDUAL  UNDER
 CONTROL  OR  UNDER  AN  ATTEMPT TO CONTROL.  SUCH RULES AND REGULATIONS
 SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, TRAINING REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL  LAW
 ENFORCEMENT  OFFICERS  TO  BE  COMPLETED  PRIOR  TO  THE USE OF ANY SUCH
 PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04701-01-3