# Requires copies and abstracts of certain provisions, rules and orders to be provided to new hires

**Bill ID:** S5124
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pete Harckham
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5124 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5124)

## Summary

Requires copies and abstracts of certain provisions, rules and orders to be provided to new hires both physically and digitally.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5124
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HARCKHAM -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Investigations and Govern-
  ment Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the  tax  law,  in  relation  to  requiring  copies  and
  abstracts  of  certain  provisions, rules and orders to be provided to
  new hires

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  171-h  of the tax law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 5 to read as follows:
  (5) LAWS AND ORDERS TO BE PROVIDED TO NEW HIRES.  WHENEVER INDIVIDUALS
 ARE NEWLY HIRED OR RE-HIRED WHO ARE AFFECTED BY THE PROVISIONS  OF  THIS
 CHAPTER,  THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL  FURNISH  TO  THE  EMPLOYER COPIES OR
 ABSTRACTS OF SUCH PROVISIONS, RULES AND ORDERS AS THE  COMMISSIONER  MAY
 DEEM NECESSARY AFFECTING SUCH INDIVIDUALS. THE COPIES OR ABSTRACTS SHALL
 BE  IN  SUCH  LANGUAGE AS THE COMMISSIONER MAY REQUIRE AND SHALL BE KEPT
 POSTED BY THE EMPLOYER IN A CONSPICUOUS  PLACE  PURSUANT  TO  RULES  AND
 REGULATIONS  PROMULGATED  BY  THE COMMISSIONER. DIGITAL VERSIONS OF SUCH
 COPIES AND ABSTRACTS SHALL ALSO BE MADE AVAILABLE THROUGH THE EMPLOYER'S
 WEBSITE OR BY EMAIL.  EMPLOYERS  SHALL  PROVIDE  NOTICE  THAT  DOCUMENTS
 REQUIRED  FOR  PHYSICAL  POSTING  ARE  ALSO  AVAILABLE  ELECTRONICALLY.
 EMPLOYERS SHALL PROVIDE THE DEPARTMENT WITH AN EMAIL  ADDRESS  FOR  EACH
 NEWLY  HIRED OR RE-HIRED EMPLOYEE REPORTED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION THREE
 OF THIS SECTION, AND THE DEPARTMENT SHALL AUTOMATICALLY EMAIL  ANY  SUCH
 DIGITAL  VERSIONS  OF COPIES AND ABSTRACTS AFFECTING SUCH NEWLY HIRED OR
 RE-HIRED EMPLOYEE. ALL OTHER DOCUMENTS REQUIRED TO BE PHYSICALLY  POSTED
 AT  A  WORKSITE  PURSUANT  TO STATE OR FEDERAL LAWS OR REGULATIONS SHALL
 ALSO BE MADE ELECTRONICALLY AVAILABLE IN THE MANNER  DESCRIBED  PURSUANT
 TO THIS SECTION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation of this act on its effective date are authorized to be  made  and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09641-01-3