# Provides for automatic enrollment to NY-Alert on the application for a learner's permit, driver's license, non-driver identification card, or renewal thereof

**Bill ID:** S5166
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pete Harckham
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5166 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5166)

## Summary

Provides for automatic enrollment to NY-Alert on the application for a learner's permit, driver's license, non-driver identification card, or renewal thereof; requires a space for an applicant to opt out of such enrollment.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5166
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HARCKHAM -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in  relation  to  providing
  for  automatic  enrollment  to  NY-Alert  on  the  application  for  a
  learner's permit, driver's license, non-driver identification card, or
  renewal thereof
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  502 of the vehicle and traffic law is amended by
 adding a new subdivision 10 to read as follows:
  10. NY-ALERT ENROLLMENT. THE COMMISSIONER, IN  CONSULTATION  WITH  THE
 DIRECTOR  OF THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SERVICES, SHALL ENROLL
 ANY PERSON WHO APPLIES TO THE COMMISSIONER FOR SUCH PERMIT, LICENSE,  OR
 CARD  OR  RENEWAL  THEREOF IN THE STATE OFFICE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 SERVICES ALERT SYSTEM KNOWN  AS  ALERT.NY.GOV,  OR  NY-ALERT.  PROVIDED,
 HOWEVER,  THAT  THE  COMMISSIONER  SHALL  PROVIDE SEPARATE SPACE ON THE
 APPLICATION FOR A LEARNER'S PERMIT, DRIVER'S LICENSE,  NON-DRIVER  IDEN-
 TIFICATION  CARD,  OR  RENEWAL THEREOF SO THAT ANY PERSON WHO APPLIES TO
 THE COMMISSIONER FOR SUCH PERMIT, LICENSE, OR CARD  OR  RENEWAL  THEREOF
 MAY OPT TO DECLINE TO BE ENROLLED IN SUCH ALERT SYSTEM.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation of this act on its effective date are authorized to be  made  and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09084-01-3