# Relates to the notification of county boards of elections of an individual's death

**Bill ID:** S5177AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Dean Murray
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5177AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5177AA)

## Summary

Relates to the notification of county boards of elections of an individual's death and the subsequent removal of such voter's name from the applicable registration roll.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5177--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 24, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  MURRAY,  LANZA, PALUMBO -- read twice and ordered
  printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee  on  Health
  --  committee  discharged,  bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended
  and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law and the election law, in  relation
  to notifying county boards of elections of an individual's death
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 3 of section 4140 of the public health law,  as
 amended  by  chapter  476  of  the  laws  of 2002, is amended to read as
 follows:
  3. The commissioner and the department of health of the  city  of  New
 York  shall  deliver to the state board of elections[, at least monthly]
 IMMEDIATELY, BUT NO LATER THAN SEVEN BUSINESS DAYS, records in a  format
 as  mutually determined by both agencies, of the names of all persons of
 voting age for whom death certificates were issued. Such  records  shall
 be arranged by county of residence and shall include the name, residence
 address  and  birth  date  of  each  such  person.  UPON RECEIPT OF SUCH
 RECORDS, THE STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS SHALL PROVIDE SUCH INFORMATION  TO
 EACH  AFFECTED  COUNTY  BOARD OF ELECTIONS IMMEDIATELY BUT NO LATER THAN
 SEVEN BUSINESS DAYS.
  ยง 2. Section 5-400 of the election law is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 subdivision 3 to read as follows:
  3.  UPON  NOTIFICATION BY THE STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS OF A REGISTERED
 VOTER'S DEATH PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION THREE OF SECTION FORTY-ONE HUNDRED
 FORTY OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH  LAW,  SUCH  VOTER'S  REGISTRATION  SHALL  BE
 CANCELLED AND IMMEDIATELY REMOVED FROM THE REGISTRATION ROLL.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07741-03-3