# Adds certain substances to the schedules of controlled substances

**Bill ID:** S5200
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Skoufis
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5200 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5200)

## Summary

Adds certain substances already listed under 21 U.S.C. Section 812 to the schedules of controlled substances.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5200
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SKOUFIS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to adding  substances
  to the schedules of controlled substances
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision (b) of schedule I of section 3306 of the public
 health law is amended by adding three new paragraphs 71, 72  and  73  to
 read as follows:
  (71)  N-(1-PHENETHYLPIPERIDIN-4-YL)-N-PHENYLPENTANAMIDE.  OTHER NAMES:
 VALERYL FENTANYL.
  (72)  N-(4-CHLOROPHENYL)-N-(1-PHENETHYLPIPERIDIN-4-YL)ISOBUTYRAMIDE.
 OTHER NAMES: PARA-CHLOROISOBUTYRYL FENTANYL.
  (73)  N-(4-METHOXYPHENYL)-N-(1-PHENETHYLPIPERIDIN-4-YL)BUTYRAMIDE.
 OTHER NAMES: PARA-METHOXYBUTYRYL FENTANYL.
  ยง 2.  Subdivision (c) of schedule II of section  3306  of  the  public
 health law is amended by adding a new paragraph 30 to read as follows:
  (30) N-PHENYL-N-(PIPERIDIN-4-YL)PROPIONAMIDE (NORFENTANYL).
  ยง  3.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06863-01-3