# Provides for the creation and maintenance of digital records for each incarcerated individual

**Bill ID:** S5267
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5267 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5267)

## Summary

Provides for the creation and maintenance of digital records for each incarcerated individual which includes all medical records, including but not limited to mental health records and results of drug or alcohol tests, work records and evaluations, conduct records and programming records.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5267
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 1, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Crime Victims,  Crime  and
  Correction
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the correction law, in relation to providing for the
  creation and maintenance of  digital  records  for  each  incarcerated
  individual

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 112 of the correction law is amended  by  adding  a
 new subdivision 6 to read as follows:
  6.  THE  COMMISSIONER SHALL PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS TO ESTAB-
 LISH AND MAINTAIN A DIGITAL RECORD WHICH INCLUDES ALL  MEDICAL  RECORDS,
 INCLUDING  BUT  NOT LIMITED TO MENTAL HEALTH RECORDS AND RESULTS OF DRUG
 OR ALCOHOL TESTS, WORK RECORDS  AND  EVALUATIONS,  CONDUCT  RECORDS  AND
 PROGRAMMING  RECORDS,  PERTAINING TO EACH INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL IN THE
 STATE. THE SUPERINTENDENT OF EACH CORRECTIONAL FACILITY  SHALL  TRANSMIT
 TO  THE DEPARTMENT SUCH RECORDS FOR EACH INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL IN SUCH
 FACILITY. SUCH DIGITAL RECORD SHALL BE ACCESSIBLE TO  SUCH  INCARCERATED
 INDIVIDUAL.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation of this act on its effective date are authorized to be  made  and
 completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07953-01-3