# Requires paid sick leave does not count against other paid time off

**Bill ID:** S5296
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Nathalia Fernandez
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5296 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5296)

## Summary

Requires paid sick leave does not count against other paid time off.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5296
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 1, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. FERNANDEZ -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Labor
 
 AN  ACT to amend the labor law, in relation to requiring paid sick leave
  does not count against other paid time off
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The labor law is amended by adding a new section 210-b to
 read as follows:
  ยง 210-B. USE OF PAID SICK LEAVE. 1. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION:
  A. "EMPLOYEE" MEANS ANY INDIVIDUAL WHO PERFORMS SERVICES FOR AND UNDER
 THE CONTROL AND DIRECTION OF AN EMPLOYER FOR WAGES  OR  OTHER  REMUNERA-
 TION.
  B. "EMPLOYER" MEANS ANY PERSON, FIRM, PARTNERSHIP, INSTITUTION, LIMIT-
 ED  LIABILITY  COMPANY,  CORPORATION  OR ASSOCIATION THAT EMPLOYS ONE OR
 MORE EMPLOYEES; AND THE STATE, ANY POLITICAL  SUBDIVISION  THEREOF,  ANY
 DEPARTMENT,  BOARD,  BUREAU,  DIVISION,  COMMISSION,  COMMITTEE,  PUBLIC
 AUTHORITY, PUBLIC CORPORATION, COUNCIL,  OFFICE  OR  OTHER  GOVERNMENTAL
 ENTITY  PERFORMING  A GOVERNMENTAL OR PROPRIETARY FUNCTION FOR THE STATE
 OR ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF.
  C. "PAID SICK LEAVE" MEANS THE PAYMENT OF THE FULL WAGES OF AN EMPLOY-
 EE DURING ANY PERIOD OF SUCH EMPLOYEE'S ABSENCE FROM HIS OR HER  EMPLOY-
 MENT  BECAUSE  OF  ILLNESS,  INJURY, MEDICAL CONDITION, NEED FOR MEDICAL
 DIAGNOSIS OR TREATMENT FOR  HIMSELF,  HERSELF,  OR  HIS  OR  HER  CHILD,
 SPOUSE, PARENT, GRANDPARENT, GRANDCHILD, SIBLING, OR AUNT OR UNCLE.
  2.  PAID  SICK  LEAVE  TAKEN  BY  AN  EMPLOYEE  SHALL  NOT RESULT IN A
 REDUCTION OF PAID TIME OFF  FOR  PURPOSES  OTHER  THAN  SICK  LEAVE.  AN
 EMPLOYER  SHALL  NOT  REDUCE  PAID TIME OFF FOR PURPOSES OTHER THAN SICK
 LEAVE WHEN AN EMPLOYEE WISHES TO USE PAID SICK LEAVE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00056-01-3