# Relates to designating a portion of the state highway system as the "Sergeant Gregory Wahl Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** S5317
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Alexis Weik
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5317 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5317)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Sergeant Gregory Wahl Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5317
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 1, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  WEIK  --  read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "Sergeant Gregory Wahl Memorial  High-
  way"

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-o to
 read as follows:
  ยง 344-O. PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED  AS  THE
 "SERGEANT  GREGORY WAHL MEMORIAL HIGHWAY". ALL THAT PORTION OF THE STATE
 HIGHWAY SYSTEM CONSTITUTING THE SOUTHERN STATE PARKWAY BETWEEN  SAGTIKOS
 PARKWAY  AND STATE ROUTE ONE HUNDRED ELEVEN IN THE TOWN OF ISLIP, COUNTY
 OF SUFFOLK, SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS THE "SERGEANT GREGORY  WAHL
 MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".
  ยง  2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the instal-
 lation and maintenance of adequate signing of the state  highway  system
 as  designated  pursuant  to  section one of this act. However, to avoid
 confusion and to limit any possible disruption of commerce,  the  desig-
 nation  called  for  pursuant to section one of this act shall be one of
 ceremonial nature and the official name of such  highway  shall  not  be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09290-01-3