# Relates to designating the Zone Sergeant James G. Sweeney Memorial Bridge

**Bill ID:** S5362CC
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Rolison
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S5362CC PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5362CC)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system in the town of East Fishkill the "Zone Sergeant James G. Sweeney Memorial Bridge".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5362--C
  Cal. No. 693
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 2, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ROLISON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation -- reported
  favorably from said committee, ordered to  first  report,  amended  on
  first  report,  ordered  to  a  second  report  and ordered reprinted,
  retaining its place in the order of second report -- reported  favora-
  bly  from said committee, amended on second report, ordered to a third
  reading, amended and ordered reprinted, retaining  its  place  in  the
  order of third reading -- again amended and ordered reprinted, retain-
  ing its place in the order of third reading
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the  state highway system as the "Zone Sergeant James G. Sweeney Memo-
  rial Bridge"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-o to
 read as follows:
  ยง  344-O.  PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "ZONE SERGEANT JAMES G. SWEENEY MEMORIAL BRIDGE".  ALL THAT  PORTION  OF
 THE  STATE  HIGHWAY  SYSTEM  CONSTITUTING  THE BRIDGE ON LIME KILN ROAD,
 CROSSING INTERSTATE ROUTE EIGHTY-FOUR IN  THE  TOWN  OF  EAST  FISHKILL,
 COUNTY  OF DUTCHESS, SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS THE "ZONE SERGEANT
 JAMES G. SWEENEY MEMORIAL BRIDGE".
  ยง 2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the  instal-
 lation  and  maintenance of adequate signing of the state highway system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this  act.  However,  to  avoid
 confusion  and  to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the desig-
 nation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall  be  one  of
 ceremonial  nature  and  the  official  name of such bridge shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09095-12-3