# Requires the state police to have a local liaison within the New York state intelligence center who alerts municipalities of certain suspected domestic extremism threats

**Bill ID:** S5370
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pete Harckham
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5370 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5370)

## Summary

Requires the state police to have a local liaison within the New York state intelligence center who alerts municipalities of certain suspected domestic extremism threats and receives information from local law enforcement regarding domestic extremism.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5370
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HARCKHAM -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Finance
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law, in relation to  requiring  the  state
  police  to have a local liaison within the New York state intelligence
  center who alerts municipalities of certain suspected domestic extrem-
  ism threats

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The executive law is amended by adding a new section 214-i
 to read as follows:
  ยง 214-I. LOCAL LIAISON.  WITHIN THE STATE POLICE, THERE  SHALL  BE  AT
 LEAST  ONE  PERSON  WITHIN THE NEW YORK STATE INTELLIGENCE CENTER DESIG-
 NATED THE LOCAL LIAISON.  THE LOCAL LIAISON'S DUTIES SHALL INCLUDE,  BUT
 NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  1. ALERTING MUNICIPALITIES OF SUSPECTED DOMESTIC EXTREMISM THREATS.
  2.  RECEIVING INFORMATION FROM LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT REGARDING DOMES-
 TIC EXTREMISM THREATS, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, DOMESTIC  EXTREMISM
 THREATS  MADE  ON  SOCIAL MEDIA AND ONLINE LOCATIONS AND ACTIVITIES THAT
 FACILITATE RADICALIZATION AND PROMOTE VIOLENT EXTREMISM.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09987-01-3