# Requires schools to include instruction on the prevention of co-occurring disorders as an integral part of their health education programs

**Bill ID:** S5373
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pete Harckham
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5373 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5373)

## Summary

Requires schools to include instruction on the prevention of co-occurring disorders as an integral part of their health education programs.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5373
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HARCKHAM -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Alcoholism  and  Substance
  Use Disorders
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the education law, in relation to requiring schools to
  include instruction on the prevention of co-occurring disorders as  an
  integral part of their health education programs

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The section heading of section 804 of the education law, as
 amended by chapter 390 of the laws of 2016, is amended and a new  subdi-
 vision 5-a is added to read as follows:
  Health  education  regarding  mental  health,  alcohol, drugs, tobacco
 abuse, CO-OCCURRING  DISORDERS  and  the  prevention  and  detection  of
 certain cancers.
  5-A. INSTRUCTION REGARDING THE PREVENTION OF CO-OCCURRING DISORDERS AS
 A  BRIDGE  BETWEEN UNITS ON MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE MISUSE/ADDICTION
 SHALL BE INCLUDED IN THE HEALTH EDUCATION PROVIDED FOR ALL  JUNIOR  HIGH
 SCHOOL  GRADES  AND  THE SENIOR HIGH SCHOOLS.  SUCH INSTRUCTION SHALL BE
 DESIGNED ACCORDING TO THE NEEDS AND ABILITIES OF THE PUPILS  AT  SUCCES-
 SIVE  GRADE LEVELS WITH THE PURPOSE OF EDUCATING ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE OF
 MAINTAINING MENTAL HEALTH AND WELLNESS, FOSTERING AND DEVELOPING HEALTHY
 DECISION MAKING  THROUGH  AN  UNDERSTANDING  OF  PATHWAYS  TO  SUBSTANCE
 MISUSE/ADDICTION AND PREPARING PUPILS TO LIVE HEALTHY LIVES. IN DEVELOP-
 ING  SUCH  INSTRUCTION,  THE  COMMISSIONER MAY CONSULT WITH THE ADVISORY
 COUNCIL ON UNDERAGE  ALCOHOL  CONSUMPTION  AND  YOUTH  SUBSTANCE  ABUSE,
 ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO SECTION 19.06 OF THE MENTAL HYGIENE LAW, AND THE
 ADOLESCENT  SUICIDE  PREVENTION PROGRAM, ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO SECTION
 41.49 OF THE MENTAL HYGIENE LAW.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the first of July  next  succeeding
 the date on which it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the
 addition,  amendment  and/or  repeal of any rule or regulation necessary
 for the implementation of this act on its effective date are  authorized
 to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09962-01-3