# Prohibits health insurers from requiring prior authorization for anti-retroviral medication used to treat and prevent HIV infection

**Bill ID:** S5374
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pete Harckham
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5374 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5374)

## Summary

Prohibits health insurers, health care plans and HMOs from requiring prior authorization for anti-retroviral medication used to treat and prevent HIV infection.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5374
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HARCKHAM -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law and the insurance law, in relation
  to prohibiting health insurers from requiring prior authorization  for
  anti-retroviral medication used to treat and prevent HIV infection

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 4406-c of the  public  health  law  is  amended  by
 adding a new subdivision 13 to read as follows:
  13. A HEALTH CARE PLAN WHICH PROVIDES PRESCRIPTION DRUG COVERAGE SHALL
 NOT  REQUIRE  A  PRIOR  AUTHORIZATION  DETERMINATION FOR ANTI-RETROVIRAL
 MEDICATION USED TO TREAT AND PREVENT  HIV  INFECTION.  NOTHING  IN  THIS
 SUBDIVISION  SHALL  PROHIBIT A HEALTH CARE PLAN FROM DENYING A CLAIM FOR
 SUCH SERVICES IF THE SERVICES ARE SUBSEQUENTLY DETERMINED NOT  MEDICALLY
 NECESSARY.
  ยง  2.  Section  3217-b of the insurance law is amended by adding a new
 subsection (p) to read as follows:
  (P) AN INSURER WHICH PROVIDES PRESCRIPTION  DRUG  COVERAGE  SHALL  NOT
 REQUIRE  A PRIOR AUTHORIZATION DETERMINATION FOR ANTI-RETROVIRAL MEDICA-
 TION USED TO TREAT AND PREVENT HIV INFECTION. NOTHING IN THIS SUBSECTION
 SHALL PROHIBIT AN INSURER FROM DENYING A CLAIM FOR SUCH SERVICES IF  THE
 SERVICES ARE SUBSEQUENTLY DETERMINED NOT MEDICALLY NECESSARY.
  ยง  3.  Section  4325  of  the insurance law is amended by adding a new
 subsection (p) to read as follows:
  (P)  A  CORPORATION  ORGANIZED  UNDER  THIS  ARTICLE  WHICH  PROVIDES
 PRESCRIPTION  DRUG  COVERAGE  SHALL  NOT  REQUIRE  A PRIOR AUTHORIZATION
 DETERMINATION FOR ANTI-RETROVIRAL MEDICATION USED TO TREAT  AND  PREVENT
 HIV  INFECTION.  NOTHING IN THIS SUBSECTION SHALL PROHIBIT A CORPORATION
 ORGANIZED UNDER THIS ARTICLE FROM DENYING A CLAIM FOR SUCH  SERVICES  IF
 THE SERVICES ARE SUBSEQUENTLY DETERMINED NOT MEDICALLY NECESSARY.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09965-01-3