# Provides for the revocation of a person's driver's license who has been convicted of operating a vessel while under the influence of alcohol or drugs

**Bill ID:** S5424AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Monica Martinez
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S5424AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5424AA)

## Summary

Provides for the revocation of a person's driver's license who has been convicted of operating a vessel while under the influence of alcohol or drugs.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5424--A
  Cal. No. 460
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. MARTINEZ, ADDABBO, BORRELLO, PALUMBO -- read twice
  and ordered printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee
  on Transportation -- recommitted to the Committee on Transportation in
  accordance with Senate Rule 6, sec. 8 -- reported favorably from  said
  committee,  ordered  to  first  and  second report, ordered to a third
  reading, amended and ordered reprinted, retaining  its  place  in  the
  order of third reading
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the navigation law and the vehicle and traffic law, in
  relation  to  revoking  a  person's  driver's  license  following  the
  conviction  of operating a vessel while under the influence of alcohol
  or drugs
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section 49-a of the navigation law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 3-a to read as follows:
  3-A. PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE; SUSPENSION. THE COURT SHALL
 SUSPEND A PERSON'S PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE AND MAY  SUSPEND
 A  MOTOR VEHICLE REGISTRATION IN THE SAME MANNER AS DEFINED UNDER SUBDI-
 VISION TWO OF SECTION ELEVEN HUNDRED NINETY-THREE  OF  THE  VEHICLE  AND
 TRAFFIC  LAW  WHERE AN OPERATOR IS CONVICTED OF A VIOLATION OF PARAGRAPH
 (A), (B), (D) OR (E) OF SUBDIVISION TWO OF THIS SECTION OR  A  VIOLATION
 OF SECTION FORTY-NINE-B OF THIS PART.
  ยง  2.  Clause (c) of subparagraph 12 of paragraph (b) of subdivision 2
 of section 1193 of the vehicle and traffic law, as added by chapter  732
 of the laws of 2006, is amended to read as follows:
  (c)  For  revocations OR SUSPENSIONS imposed pursuant to clause (a) of
 this subparagraph AND SUBDIVISION 3-A OF  SECTION  FORTY-NINE-A  OF  THE
 NAVIGATION  LAW,  the commissioner may adopt rules to permit conditional
 or restricted operation of a motor vehicle by any such  person  after  a
 mandatory revocation period of not less than three years subject to such
 criteria, terms and conditions as established by the commissioner.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06289-02-4