# Establishes the definition for legislation

**Bill ID:** S5484
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Dan Stec
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5484 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5484)

## Summary

Establishes the definition for legislation; provides that such proposed language shall be presented in a clear and concise manner, be limited to 50 pages and use words that have common everyday meanings.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5484
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 6, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  STEC  --  read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the general construction law, in relation to  the  defi-
  nition of legislation
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The general construction law is amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 27-a to read as follows:
  ยง  27-A.  LEGISLATION.  THE  TERM  "LEGISLATION"  SHALL  REFER  TO ANY
 PROPOSED LANGUAGE PREPARED IN ACCORDANCE WITH NEW YORK  STATE  LAW,  THE
 RULES  OF THE ASSEMBLY AND THE RULES OF THE SENATE BY THE NEW YORK STATE
 LEGISLATIVE BILL DRAFTING COMMISSION FOR INTRODUCTION AND PASSAGE BY THE
 NEW YORK STATE LEGISLATURE, WHETHER SUCH LANGUAGE BE CONSIDERED  CONSOL-
 IDATED  OR  UNCONSOLIDATED  FOR  THE  PURPOSES  OF  ENACTMENT.  ANY SUCH
 LANGUAGE SHALL BE PREPARED IN A CLEAR AND CONCISE MANNER, BE LIMITED  TO
 NO  MORE  THAN  FIFTY PAGES, AND CONSIST OF WORDS HAVING COMMON EVERYDAY
 MEANINGS. THE ACCOMPANYING  INTRODUCER'S  MEMORANDUM  OF  SUPPORT  SHALL
 IDENTIFY  ORGANIZATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS OR OTHER NON-GOVERNMENTAL INDIVID-
 UALS WHO HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO SUCH LEGISLATIVE LANGUAGE AND  EXPLAIN  THE
 FINANCIAL COST AND EXPECTED FUNDING SOURCES FOR SUCH LEGISLATION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06947-01-3