# Exempts Staten Island residents from Verrazzano-Narrows bridge tolls

**Bill ID:** S5507
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jessica Scarcella-Spanton
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5507 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5507)

## Summary

Exempts Staten Island residents from Verrazzano-Narrows bridge tolls; directs the Triborough bridge and tunnel authority to create applications for such exemptions.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5507
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 6, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. SCARCELLA-SPANTON -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the public authorities law,  in  relation  to  exempting
  Staten Island residents from Verrazzano-Narrows bridge tolls
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The public authorities law  is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 553-l to read as follows:
  ยง  553-L. VERRAZZANO-NARROWS BRIDGE; STATEN ISLAND RESIDENT EXEMPTION.
 NOTWITHSTANDING ANY INCONSISTENT PROVISION OF LAW, BUT SUBJECT TO AGREE-
 MENTS WITH NOTEHOLDERS AND BONDHOLDERS, THE AUTHORITY SHALL EXEMPT RESI-
 DENTS OF THE BOROUGH OF STATEN ISLAND USING A NEW YORK CUSTOMER  SERVICE
 E-ZPASS ACCOUNT ON THE VERRAZZANO-NARROWS BRIDGE FROM THE PAYMENT OF ANY
 TOLLS  THEREFOR,  PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT SUCH EXEMPTION SHALL NOT APPLY
 TO TRIPS MADE BY VEHICLES THAT ARE USED FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.  APPLI-
 CATION FOR SUCH TOLL EXEMPTION SHALL BE MADE IN SUCH MANNER AS SHALL  BE
 PRESCRIBED  BY  THE  AUTHORITY AND SHALL CONTAIN SUCH INFORMATION AS THE
 AUTHORITY MAY REASONABLY REQUIRE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or
 repeal  of  any  rule  or regulation necessary for the implementation of
 this act on its effective date are authorized to be made  and  completed
 on or before such effective date.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06837-01-3