# Enacts the lead pipe right to know act

**Bill ID:** S5512
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Gustavo Rivera
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S5512 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5512)

## Summary

Enacts the lead pipe right to know act requiring public water systems to take service line inventories and make such information available to the public.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5512
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 6, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  RIVERA -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to enacting the  lead
  pipe right to know act
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Short title. This act shall be known and may  be  cited  as
 the "lead pipe right to know act".
  ยง  2.  The public health law is amended by adding a new section 1114-b
 to read as follows:
  ยง 1114-B. SERVICE LINE INVENTORIES AND MAPPING. 1. DEFINITIONS.  FOR
 THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION:
  (A)  "SERVICE  LINE"  MEANS  ANY  PIPING  CONNECTING A WATER MAIN TO A
 BUILDING INLET.
  (B) "GOOSENECK, PIGTAIL,  OR  CONNECTOR"  MEANS  A  SHORT  SECTION  OF
 PIPING, TYPICALLY NOT EXCEEDING TWO FEET, WHICH CAN BE BENT AND USED FOR
 CONNECTIONS BETWEEN RIGID PORTIONS OF A SERVICE LINE.
  (C) "GALVANIZED SERVICE LINE" MEANS IRON OR STEEL PIPING THAT HAS BEEN
 DIPPED IN ZINC TO PREVENT CORROSION AND RUSTING.
  (D) "COVERED PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM" MEANS (I) A PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM THAT
 SERVES AT LEAST FIVE SERVICE CONNECTIONS USED BY YEAR-ROUND RESIDENTS OR
 REGULARLY  SERVES  AT  LEAST TWENTY-FIVE YEAR-ROUND RESIDENTS; OR (II) A
 PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM THAT REGULARLY SERVES AT LEAST  TWENTY-FIVE  OF  THE
 SAME PEOPLE, FOUR HOURS OR MORE PER DAY, FOR FOUR OR MORE DAYS PER WEEK,
 FOR TWENTY-SIX OR MORE WEEKS PER YEAR.
  2. EACH COVERED PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM SHALL SUBMIT A SERVICE LINE INVEN-
 TORY, IN A FORMAT TO BE DEVELOPED BY THE DEPARTMENT, THAT IDENTIFIES THE
 LOCATION,  MATERIAL  COMPOSITION, AND OTHER DETAILS OF ALL SERVICE LINES
 CONNECTED TO ITS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. EACH COVERED PUBLIC  WATER  SYSTEM
 SHALL ALSO SUBMIT AN INVENTORY SUMMARY FORM, IN A FORMAT TO BE DEVELOPED
 BY  THE  DEPARTMENT, SUMMARIZING THE DATA IDENTIFIED IN THE SERVICE LINE
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08102-02-3
 S. 5512  2
 
 INVENTORY. THE DEVELOPMENT OF SERVICE  LINE  INVENTORIES  AND  INVENTORY
 SUMMARY  FORMS  SHALL COMPLY WITH REQUIREMENTS PROMULGATED BY THE UNITED
 STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  AGENCY  AS  WELL  AS  COMPLY  WITH  THE
 PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.
  3.  EACH  SERVICE  LINE  CONNECTED  TO A COVERED PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM'S
 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SHALL BE LISTED IN SERVICE  LINE  INVENTORIES.  EACH
 COVERED  PUBLIC  WATER  SYSTEM  SHALL  INCLUDE FOR EACH SERVICE LINE THE
 INFORMATION LISTED IN THIS SUBDIVISION. FOR SOME CATEGORIES, THE COVERED
 PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM MAY MARK "UNKNOWN" WHERE DOCUMENTED EVIDENCE IS  NOT
 CURRENTLY AVAILABLE:
  (A) STREET ADDRESS;
  (B) TOWN;
  (C) ZIP CODE;
  (D)  WHETHER  A GOOSENECK, PIGTAIL, OR CONNECTOR MADE OF LEAD IS PRES-
 ENT;
  (E) THE MATERIAL COMPOSITION OF BOTH THE PUBLIC PORTION  AND  CUSTOMER
 PORTION OF THE SERVICE LINE;
  (F) WHETHER THE PUBLIC PORTION OR CUSTOMER PORTION OF THE SERVICE LINE
 WAS EVER MADE OF LEAD;
  (G) THE VERIFICATION METHOD USED TO DETERMINE THE MATERIAL COMPOSITION
 OF BOTH THE PUBLIC PORTION AND CUSTOMER PORTION OF THE SERVICE LINE;
  (H)  THE  INSTALLATION  OR REPLACEMENT DATE OF BOTH THE PUBLIC PORTION
 AND CUSTOMER PORTION OF THE SERVICE LINE;
  (I) THE DIAMETER OF BOTH THE PUBLIC PORTION AND  CUSTOMER  PORTION  OF
 THE SERVICE LINE;
  (J) WHETHER LEAD SOLDER IS PRESENT;
  (K) THE BUILDING TYPE; AND
  (L) WHETHER A POINT OF USE OR POINT OF ENTRY TREATMENT SYSTEM IS PRES-
 ENT.
  4.  INVENTORY  SUMMARY FORMS SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, THE
 FOLLOWING INFORMATION ABOUT EACH COVERED WATER SYSTEM:
  (A) WATER SYSTEM NAME AND IDENTIFICATION NUMBER;
  (B) CONTACT INFORMATION FOR THE OWNER OR LICENSED OPERATOR  OF  RECORD
 COMPLETING THE FORM;
  (C) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF SERVICE LINES IN THE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM;
  (D) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF LEAD SERVICE LINES, INCLUDING THE TOTAL NUMBER
 OF  LEAD  PUBLIC  SERVICE  LINE  PORTIONS  AND  THE TOTAL NUMBER OF LEAD
 CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE PORTIONS;
  (E) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF GALVANIZED SERVICE  LINES  REQUIRING  REPLACE-
 MENT,  INCLUDING  THE  TOTAL  NUMBER  OF  GALVANIZED PUBLIC SERVICE LINE
 PORTIONS AND THE  TOTAL  NUMBER  OF  GALVANIZED  CUSTOMER  SERVICE  LINE
 PORTIONS;
  (F)  THE  TOTAL  NUMBER OF NON-LEAD SERVICE LINES, INCLUDING THE TOTAL
 NUMBER OF NON-LEAD PUBLIC SERVICE LINE PORTIONS AND THE TOTAL NUMBER  OF
 NON-LEAD CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE PORTIONS;
  (G)  THE  TOTAL NUMBER OF SERVICE LINES OF UNKNOWN MATERIAL, INCLUDING
 THE TOTAL NUMBER OF UNKNOWN PUBLIC SERVICE LINE PORTIONS AND  THE  TOTAL
 NUMBER OF UNKNOWN CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE PORTIONS;
  (H)  THE  TOTAL  NUMBER  OF PUBLIC SERVICE LINE PORTIONS IDENTIFIED BY
 HISTORICAL RECORDS,  FIELD  INSPECTIONS,  CUSTOMER  IDENTIFICATION  WITH
 PHOTO  OR  OTHER  VERIFICATION,  EXCAVATION,  SEQUENTIAL  SAMPLING,  AND
 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS/PREDICTIVE MODELING;
  (I) THE TOTAL  NUMBER  OF  CUSTOMER  SERVICE  PORTIONS  IDENTIFIED  BY
 HISTORICAL  RECORDS,  FIELD  INSPECTIONS,  CUSTOMER  IDENTIFICATION WITH
 PHOTO  OR  OTHER  VERIFICATION,  EXCAVATION,  SEQUENTIAL  SAMPLING,  AND
 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS/PREDICTIVE MODELING;
 S. 5512  3
 
  (J) A DESCRIPTION OF HOW THE SERVICE LINE INVENTORY WILL BE ACCESSIBLE
 TO THE PUBLIC; AND
  (K) A CERTIFICATION VERIFYING THE ACCURACY OF THE INFORMATION.
  5. EACH COVERED PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM SHALL ELECTRONICALLY SUBMIT TO THE
 DEPARTMENT  AN  INITIAL  SERVICE LINE INVENTORY AND AN INITIAL INVENTORY
 SUMMARY FORM NO LATER THAN OCTOBER SIXTEENTH, TWO THOUSAND  TWENTY-FOUR.
 THE DEPARTMENT MAY PRESCRIBE DATA MANAGEMENT MEANS AND METHODS FOR ELEC-
 TRONIC  SUBMISSIONS  BY  COVERED  PUBLIC  WATER  SYSTEMS  FOR UNIFORMITY
 PURPOSES.
  6. COVERED PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS WHOSE INVENTORIES CONTAIN ANY  SERVICE
 LINES  CLASSIFIED  AS  LEAD, GALVANIZED, OR UNKNOWN SHALL ELECTRONICALLY
 SUBMIT UPDATED SERVICE LINE INVENTORIES AND INVENTORY SUMMARY  FORMS  TO
 THE  DEPARTMENT  AT LEAST ANNUALLY. UPDATED SERVICE LINE INVENTORIES AND
 INVENTORY SUMMARY FORMS SHALL REFLECT INFORMATION  GATHERED  DURING  ANY
 SERVICE  LINE REPLACEMENTS OR SERVICE LINE MATERIAL INSPECTIONS THAT MAY
 HAVE BEEN CONDUCTED. UPDATED INVENTORY SUMMARY FORMS SHALL  ADDITIONALLY
 INCLUDE:
  (A)  A  DESCRIPTION  DETAILING  THE STEPS BEING TAKEN TO DETERMINE THE
 MATERIAL COMPOSITION OF UNKNOWN SERVICE LINES;
  (B) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF SERVICE LINES CLASSIFIED AS LEAD,  GALVANIZED,
 OR UNKNOWN THAT WERE REPLACED OVER THE COURSE OF THE PREVIOUS YEAR; AND
  (C)  THE TOTAL NUMBER OF SERVICE LINES CLASSIFIED AS UNKNOWN THAT WERE
 DETERMINED TO BE LEAD, GALVANIZED, OR OTHER MATERIAL OVER THE COURSE  OF
 THE PREVIOUS YEAR.
  7.  EACH  COVERED  PUBLIC  WATER SYSTEM WHICH OPERATES ITS OWN WEBSITE
 SHALL MAKE ITS MOST RECENT SERVICE LINE INVENTORY AND INVENTORY  SUMMARY
 FORM AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC ON ITS WEBSITE.
  8.  NO  LATER  THAN  THIRTY  DAYS  AFTER RECEIVING INITIAL AND UPDATED
 SERVICE LINE INVENTORIES AND INVENTORY  SUMMARY  FORMS,  THE  DEPARTMENT
 SHALL MAKE SUCH INVENTORIES AND INVENTORY SUMMARY FORMS AVAILABLE TO THE
 PUBLIC  ON  THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE. EACH LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT SHALL
 INCLUDE A LINK ON ITS WEBSITE TO THE WEBSITE OPERATED BY THE  DEPARTMENT
 FOR HOSTING SERVICE LINE INVENTORIES AND INVENTORY SUMMARY FORMS.
  9. NO LATER THAN THREE HUNDRED SIXTY DAYS AFTER OCTOBER SIXTEENTH, TWO
 THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE THE INFORMATION FROM THE
 SERVICE  LINE  INVENTORIES  OF COVERED PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS SERVING MORE
 THAN TEN THOUSAND PEOPLE AVAILABLE TO THE  PUBLIC  ON  THE  DEPARTMENT'S
 WEBSITE  IN THE FORM OF AN INTERACTIVE MAP OR MAPS. SUCH INTERACTIVE MAP
 OR MAPS SHALL INCLUDE, FOR EACH SERVICE LINE:
  (A) MATERIAL CLASSIFICATION, INCLUDING THE MATERIAL CLASSIFICATION  OF
 BOTH THE PUBLIC AND CUSTOMER PORTIONS OF A SERVICE LINE;
  (B) STREET ADDRESS; AND
  (C) THE VERIFICATION METHOD FOR THE SERVICE LINE CLASSIFICATION.
  10.  THE  DEPARTMENT'S  INTERACTIVE MAP OR MAPS SHALL BE SEARCHABLE BY
 ADDRESS, AND COLOR-CODED WHERE APPLICABLE TO DESIGNATE MATERIAL  CLASSI-
 FICATION.  THE  DEPARTMENT'S INTERACTIVE MAP OR MAPS SHALL BE UPDATED AT
 LEAST ANNUALLY, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE SUBMISSION  OF  UPDATED  SERVICE
 LINE  INVENTORIES  BY  COVERED  PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS. THE DEPARTMENT MAY
 CHOOSE NOT TO CREATE AN INTERACTIVE MAP  WHEN  A  COVERED  PUBLIC  WATER
 SYSTEM CERTIFIES THAT IT MAINTAINS AND UPDATES ITS OWN INTERACTIVE MAP.
  11.  THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT SUCH RULES AND REGULATIONS AS IT DEEMS
 NECESSARY AND PROPER TO IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.