# Relates to distinctive license plates issued to congressional medal of honor recipients

**Bill ID:** S5521AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jeremy Cooney
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S5521AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5521AA)

## Summary

Provides for the issuance of distinctive license plates to the spouse of a congressional medal of honor recipient, and the transfer of distinctive license plates issued to congressional medal of honor recipients who are now deceased to their surviving spouse.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5521--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 7, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COONEY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation --  commit-
  tee  discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recom-
  mitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation to  distinctive
  license plates issued to congressional medal of honor recipients
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. This act shall be known and may be cited as  the  "Sergeant
 Gary Beikirch Memorial Act".
  ยง 2. Section 404-p of the vehicle and traffic law, as added by chapter
 486  of the laws of 1996, subdivision 3 as amended by chapter 415 of the
 laws of 2001, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 404-p. Distinctive plates for congressional medal of  honor  recipi-
 ents.  1.  Any  congressional  medal of honor recipient residing in this
 state OR THE SPOUSE OF ANY  SUCH  RECIPIENT  shall,  upon  request,  be
 issued a license plate bearing the words "congressional medal of honor".
 IF  A  DISTINCTIVE  PLATE  IS  ISSUED  TO A CONGRESSIONAL MEDAL OF HONOR
 RECIPIENT PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION, ADDITIONAL DISTINCTIVE PLATES MAY BE
 ISSUED FOR EVERY VEHICLE REGISTERED IN THE  NAME  OF  THE  CONGRESSIONAL
 MEDAL  OF  HONOR  RECIPIENT RESIDING IN THIS STATE OR THE SPOUSE OF SUCH
 CONGRESSIONAL MEDAL OF HONOR RECIPIENT.  Application  for  said  license
 plate  shall  be  filed with the commissioner in such form and detail as
 the commissioner shall prescribe.
  2. The distinctive plate authorized herein shall be issued upon proof,
 satisfactory to the commissioner, that the applicant OR  THE  SPOUSE  OF
 THE APPLICANT is a congressional medal of honor recipient.
  3. A distinctive plate issued pursuant to this section shall be issued
 in  the  same  manner as other number plates, provided, however, that no
 registration fee or service charge shall be charged for such plate.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02686-06-3