# Establishes the "It's Your Data Act"

**Bill ID:** S5555
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Leroy Comrie
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5555 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5555)

## Summary

Establishes the "It's Your Data Act" for the purposes of providing protections and transparency in the collection, use, retention, and sharing of personal information.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5555
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 8, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COMRIE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the civil rights law and the general  business  law,  in
  relation to establishing the "It's Your Data Act"
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Short title. This act shall be known and may  be  cited  as
 the "It's Your Data Act".
  § 2. Section 50 of the civil rights law is amended to read as follows:
  §  50.  Right of privacy. A person, firm or corporation that COLLECTS,
 STORES, AND/OR uses for THE PURPOSE OF advertising [purposes, or for the
 purposes of], trade, DATA-MINING, OR GENERATING COMMERCIAL  OR  ECONOMIC
 VALUE, the name, portrait [or], picture, VIDEO, VOICE, LIKENESS, AND ALL
 OTHER  PERSONAL  DATA,  BIOMETRIC  DATA, AND LOCATION DATA of any living
 person without having first obtained the written consent of such person,
 or if a minor of his or her parent or guardian, OR, IF SUCH  CONSENT  IS
 OBTAINED, SUBSEQUENTLY FAILS TO EXERCISE REASONABLE CARE CONSISTENT WITH
 ITS  OBLIGATIONS AS BAILEE OF THAT INDIVIDUAL'S NAME, PORTRAIT, PICTURE,
 VIDEO, VOICE, LIKENESS, AND ALL OTHER PERSONAL DATA, BIOMETRIC DATA, AND
 LOCATION DATA, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
  § 3. Section 51 of the civil rights law, as amended by chapter 674  of
 the laws of 1995, is amended to read as follows:
  §  51.  Action for injunction and for damages. Any person [whose name,
 portrait, picture or voice is used within  this  state  for  advertising
 purposes or for the purposes of trade without the written consent], FIRM
 OR  CORPORATION  THAT  COLLECTS,  STORES, AND/OR USES FOR THE PURPOSE OF
 ADVERTISING, TRADE, DATA-MINING, OR GENERATING  COMMERCIAL  OR  ECONOMIC
 VALUE,  NAME,  PORTRAIT,  PICTURE, VIDEO, VOICE, LIKENESS, AND ALL OTHER
 PERSONAL DATA, BIOMETRIC DATA, AND LOCATION DATA OF  ANY  LIVING  PERSON
 WITHOUT  HAVING FIRST OBTAINED THE WRITTEN CONSENT OF SUCH PERSON, OR IF
 A MINOR OF HIS OR HER PARENT OR  GUARDIAN,  OR,  WHEN  SUCH  CONSENT  IS
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03757-01-3
 S. 5555  2
 
 OBTAINED, SUBSEQUENTLY FAILS TO EXERCISE REASONABLE CARE CONSISTENT WITH
 ITS  OBLIGATIONS AS BAILEE OF THAT INDIVIDUAL'S NAME, PORTRAIT, PICTURE,
 VIDEO, VOICE, LIKENESS, AND ALL OTHER PERSONAL DATA, BIOMETRIC DATA, AND
 LOCATION DATA first obtained as above provided may maintain an equitable
 action  in  the  supreme court of this state against the person, firm or
 corporation so using his OR HER name,  portrait,  picture  [or],  VIDEO,
 voice,  LIKENESS,  AND  ALL  OTHER  PERSONAL  DATA,  BIOMETRIC DATA, AND
 LOCATION DATA to prevent and restrain the use thereof; and may also  sue
 and recover damages for any injuries sustained by reason of such use and
 if the defendant shall have knowingly used such person's name, portrait,
 picture [or], VIDEO, voice, LIKENESS, AND ALL OTHER PERSONAL DATA, BIOM-
 ETRIC DATA, AND LOCATION DATA in such manner as is forbidden or declared
 to  be  unlawful  by  section  fifty  of  this article, the jury, in its
 discretion, may award exemplary damages. But nothing contained  in  this
 article  shall  be so construed as to prevent any person, firm or corpo-
 ration from selling or otherwise transferring  any  material  containing
 such name, portrait, picture [or], VIDEO, voice, LIKENESS, AND ALL OTHER
 PERSONAL  DATA,  BIOMETRIC DATA, AND LOCATION DATA in whatever medium to
 any user of such name, portrait, picture [or], VIDEO,  voice,  LIKENESS,
 AND ALL OTHER PERSONAL DATA, BIOMETRIC DATA, AND LOCATION DATA or to any
 third  party  [for  sale]  or  transfer directly or indirectly to such a
 user, for use, PROVIDED THAT THE TRANSFERRING PARTY  UNDERTAKES  REASON-
 ABLE STEPS TO ENSURE THAT ANY SUCH USE IS CONSISTENT WITH THE SELLING OR
 TRANSFERRING  PARTY'S  OBLIGATIONS  AS BAILEE OF THAT INDIVIDUAL'S NAME,
 PORTRAIT, PICTURE, VIDEO, VOICE, LIKENESS, AND ALL OTHER PERSONAL  DATA,
 BIOMETRIC  DATA, AND LOCATION DATA AND USE in a manner lawful under this
 article; nothing contained in this article shall be so construed  as  to
 prevent  any  person,  firm or corporation, practicing the profession of
 photography, from exhibiting in or about his or its establishment speci-
 mens of the work of such establishment, unless the same is continued  by
 such  person, firm or corporation after written notice objecting thereto
 has been given by the person portrayed; and nothing  contained  in  this
 article  shall  be so construed as to prevent any person, firm or corpo-
 ration from using the name, portrait, picture [or], VIDEO, voice,  LIKE-
 NESS,  AND ALL OTHER PERSONAL DATA, BIOMETRIC DATA, AND LOCATION DATA of
 any manufacturer or dealer in  connection  with  the  goods,  wares  and
 merchandise manufactured, produced or dealt in by him OR HER which he OR
 SHE  has  sold  or  disposed  of with such name, portrait, picture [or],
 VIDEO, voice, LIKENESS, AND ALL OTHER PERSONAL DATA, BIOMETRIC DATA, AND
 LOCATION DATA used in connection therewith;  or  from  using  the  name,
 portrait,  picture  [or], VIDEO, voice, LIKENESS, AND ALL OTHER PERSONAL
 DATA, BIOMETRIC DATA, AND LOCATION  DATA  of  any  author,  composer  or
 artist  in  connection  with  his  OR  HER literary, musical or artistic
 productions which he OR SHE has sold or  disposed  of  with  such  name,
 portrait,  picture  [or], VIDEO, voice, LIKENESS, AND ALL OTHER PERSONAL
 DATA, BIOMETRIC DATA, AND LOCATION DATA used  in  connection  therewith.
 Nothing  contained  in  this  section shall be construed to prohibit the
 copyright owner of a sound recording  from  disposing  of,  dealing  in,
 licensing  or selling that sound recording to any party, if the right to
 dispose of, deal in, license or  sell  such  sound  recording  has  been
 conferred by contract or other written document by such living person or
 the  holder  of  such right. Nothing contained in the foregoing sentence
 shall be deemed to abrogate or otherwise limit any  rights  or  remedies
 otherwise conferred by federal law or state law.
  §  4. The general business law is amended by adding a new article 32-A
 to read as follows:
 S. 5555  3
 
  ARTICLE 32-A
  IT'S YOUR DATA ACT
 SECTION 676.  DEFINITIONS.
  676-A. TRANSPARENCY OF THE COLLECTION, USE, RETENTION, AND SHAR-
  ING OF PERSONAL INFORMATION.
  676-B. FAIR COLLECTION AND USE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION.
  676-C. DELETION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION.
  676-D. ACCESS TO RETAINED PERSONAL INFORMATION.
  676-E. ACCESS TO DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION.
  676-F. CONSENT  TO  ADDITIONAL COLLECTION OR SHARING OF PERSONAL
  INFORMATION.
  676-G. NO DISCRIMINATION BY A BUSINESS AGAINST  A  CONSUMER  FOR
  EXERCISE OF RIGHTS.
  676-H. REASONABLE SECURITY.
  676-I. BUSINESS IMPLEMENTATION OF DUTIES.
  676-J. EXCEPTIONS.
  676-K. CONSUMER'S PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION.
  676-L. AGENCY ENFORCEMENT ACTION.
  676-M. CONSTRUCTION.
  676-N. ATTORNEY GENERAL REGULATIONS.
  676-O. INTERMEDIATE TRANSACTIONS.
  676-P. NON-WAIVER.
  676-Q. SEVERABILITY.
  § 676. DEFINITIONS. 1. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS ARTICLE:
  (A) "AGGREGATE CONSUMER INFORMATION" MEANS INFORMATION THAT RELATES TO
 A  GROUP  OF  CONSUMERS,  FROM WHICH INDIVIDUAL CONSUMER IDENTITIES HAVE
 BEEN REMOVED, THAT IS NOT LINKED OR REASONABLY LINKABLE TO ANY  CONSUMER
 OR  HOUSEHOLD,  INCLUDING  VIA A DEVICE.  AGGREGATE CONSUMER INFORMATION
 DOES NOT MEAN ONE OR MORE INDIVIDUAL CONSUMER  RECORDS  THAT  HAVE  BEEN
 DE-IDENTIFIED.
  (B)  "BIOMETRIC  INFORMATION"  MEANS  AN  INDIVIDUAL'S  PHYSIOLOGICAL,
 BIOLOGICAL OR BEHAVIORAL CHARACTERISTICS OR AN ELECTRONIC REPRESENTATION
 OF SUCH, INCLUDING AN INDIVIDUAL'S DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID (DNA), THAT CAN
 BE USED, SINGLY OR IN COMBINATION WITH EACH OTHER OR WITH OTHER  IDENTI-
 FYING  DATA,  TO  ESTABLISH INDIVIDUAL IDENTITY.  BIOMETRIC INFORMATION
 INCLUDES, BUT IS NOT LIMITED TO, IMAGERY OF THE  IRIS,  RETINA,  FINGER-
 PRINT, FACE, HAND, PALM, VEIN PATTERNS, AND VOICE RECORDINGS, FROM WHICH
 AN  IDENTIFIER  TEMPLATE, SUCH AS A FACEPRINT, A MINUTIAE TEMPLATE, OR A
 VOICEPRINT, CAN BE EXTRACTED, AND KEYSTROKE PATTERNS  OR  RHYTHMS,  GAIT
 PATTERNS  OR  RHYTHMS,  AND SLEEP, HEALTH, OR EXERCISE DATA THAT CONTAIN
 IDENTIFYING INFORMATION.
  (C) "BUSINESS" MEANS:
  (I) A SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP,  PARTNERSHIP,  LIMITED  LIABILITY  COMPANY,
 CORPORATION,  ASSOCIATION,  OR  OTHER  LEGAL ENTITY THAT IS ORGANIZED OR
 OPERATED FOR THE PROFIT OR FINANCIAL  BENEFIT  OF  ITS  SHAREHOLDERS  OR
 OTHER  OWNERS,  THAT COLLECTS CONSUMERS' PERSONAL INFORMATION, OR ON THE
 BEHALF OF WHICH SUCH INFORMATION IS COLLECTED AND THAT ALONE, OR JOINTLY
 WITH OTHERS, DETERMINES THE PURPOSES AND  MEANS  OF  THE  PROCESSING  OF
 CONSUMERS'  PERSONAL INFORMATION, THAT DOES BUSINESS IN THE STATE OF NEW
 YORK, AND THAT SATISFIES ONE OR MORE OF THE FOLLOWING THRESHOLDS:
  (1) HAS ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES IN EXCESS OF FIFTY MILLION  DOLLARS,  AS
 ADJUSTED  PURSUANT  TO  PARAGRAPH  (F) OF SUBDIVISION ONE OF SECTION SIX
 HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-N OF THIS ARTICLE;
  (2) ALONE OR IN COMBINATION, ANNUALLY BUYS, RECEIVES FOR THE BUSINESS'
 COMMERCIAL PURPOSES, SELLS, OR DISCLOSES FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES,  ALONE
 S. 5555  4

 OR  IN  COMBINATION,  THE PERSONAL INFORMATION OF FIFTY THOUSAND OR MORE
 CONSUMERS, HOUSEHOLDS, OR DEVICES; OR
  (3)  DERIVES FIFTY PERCENT OR MORE OF ITS ANNUAL REVENUES FROM SELLING
 CONSUMERS' PERSONAL INFORMATION; AND
  (II) ANY ENTITY THAT CONTROLS OR  IS  CONTROLLED  BY  A  BUSINESS,  AS
 DEFINED  IN  SUBPARAGRAPH  (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, AND THAT SHARES COMMON
 BRANDING WITH SUCH BUSINESS.
  (D) "CONTROL" OR "CONTROLLED" MEANS OWNERSHIP  OF,  OR  THE  POWER  TO
 VOTE,  MORE THAN FIFTY PERCENT OF THE OUTSTANDING SHARES OF ANY CLASS OF
 VOTING SECURITY OF A BUSINESS; CONTROL IN ANY MANNER OVER  THE  ELECTION
 OF  A  MAJORITY  OF  THE DIRECTORS, OR OF INDIVIDUALS EXERCISING SIMILAR
 FUNCTIONS; OR THE POWER TO EXERCISE A  CONTROLLING  INFLUENCE  OVER  THE
 MANAGEMENT OF A BUSINESS.
  (E) "COMMON BRANDING" MEANS A SHARED NAME, SERVICEMARK, OR TRADEMARK.
  (F)  "OPERATIONAL  PURPOSE" MEANS THE USE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION WHEN
 REASONABLY NECESSARY AND PROPORTIONATE TO ACHIEVE ONE OF  THE  FOLLOWING
 OPERATIONAL PURPOSES:
  (I)  AUDITING  RELATED  TO A CURRENT INTERACTION WITH THE CONSUMER AND
 CONCURRENT TRANSACTIONS, INCLUDING, BUT  NOT  LIMITED  TO,  COUNTING  AD
 IMPRESSIONS  TO UNIQUE VISITORS, VERIFYING POSITIONING AND QUALITY OF AD
 IMPRESSIONS, AND AUDITING COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PARAGRAPH AND OTHER STAN-
 DARDS;
  (II)  DETECTING  AND  RESPONDING  TO  SECURITY  INCIDENTS,  PROTECTING
 AGAINST MALICIOUS, DECEPTIVE, FRAUDULENT, OR ILLEGAL ACTIVITY, AND PROS-
 ECUTING THOSE RESPONSIBLE FOR THAT ACTIVITY;
  (III)  DEBUGGING  TO  IDENTIFY  AND REPAIR ERRORS THAT IMPAIR EXISTING
 INTENDED FUNCTIONALITY;
  (IV) SHORT-TERM, TRANSIENT USE, PROVIDED THE PERSONAL  INFORMATION  IS
 NOT  DISCLOSED TO ANOTHER THIRD PARTY AND IS NOT USED TO BUILD A PROFILE
 ABOUT A CONSUMER OR OTHERWISE ALTER AN INDIVIDUAL CONSUMER'S  EXPERIENCE
 OUTSIDE  THE  CURRENT  INTERACTION,  INCLUDING,  BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
 CONTEXTUAL CUSTOMIZATION OF ADS SHOWN AS PART OF THE SAME INTERACTION;
  (V) PERFORMING OR PROVIDING SERVICES ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  BUSINESS  OR
 SERVICE  PROVIDER,  INCLUDING MAINTAINING OR SERVICING ACCOUNTS, BILLING
 OR COLLECTING FOR REQUESTED PRODUCTS  OR  SERVICES,  PROVIDING  CUSTOMER
 SERVICE,  PROCESSING  OR  FULFILLING  ORDERS AND TRANSACTIONS, VERIFYING
 CUSTOMER INFORMATION, PROCESSING PAYMENTS, PROVIDING FINANCING,  PROVID-
 ING  ADVERTISING  OR MARKETING SERVICES, PROVIDING ANALYTIC SERVICES, OR
 PROVIDING SIMILAR SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE BUSINESS OR SERVICE  PROVID-
 ER;
  (VI)  UNDERTAKING  INTERNAL RESEARCH FOR TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT AND
 DEMONSTRATION;
  (VII) UNDERTAKING ACTIVITIES TO VERIFY  OR  MAINTAIN  THE  QUALITY  OR
 SAFETY  OF A SERVICE OR DEVICE THAT IS OWNED, MANUFACTURED, MANUFACTURED
 FOR, OR CONTROLLED BY THE BUSINESS, OR TO IMPROVE, UPGRADE,  OR  ENHANCE
 THE  SERVICE OR DEVICE THAT IS OWNED, MANUFACTURED, MANUFACTURED FOR, OR
 CONTROLLED BY THE BUSINESS;
  (VIII) CUSTOMIZATION OF CONTENT; OR
  (IX) CUSTOMIZATION OF ADVERTISING OR MARKETING.
  (G) "COLLECTS," "COLLECTED," OR "COLLECTION"  MEANS  BUYING,  RENTING,
 GATHERING,  OBTAINING,  RECEIVING, OR ACCESSING ANY PERSONAL INFORMATION
 PERTAINING TO A CONSUMER BY ANY MEANS. THIS SHALL INCLUDE, BUT SHALL NOT
 BE LIMITED TO, RECEIVING INFORMATION FROM THE CONSUMER, EITHER  ACTIVELY
 OR PASSIVELY, OR BY OBSERVING THE CONSUMER'S BEHAVIOR.
  (H)  "COMMERCIAL  PURPOSES"  MEANS TO ADVANCE A PERSON'S COMMERCIAL OR
 ECONOMIC INTERESTS, SUCH AS BY INDUCING ANOTHER  PERSON  TO  BUY,  RENT,
 S. 5555  5
 
 LEASE, JOIN, SUBSCRIBE TO, PROVIDE, OR EXCHANGE PRODUCTS, GOODS, PROPER-
 TY,  INFORMATION,  OR  SERVICES,  OR  ENABLING OR EFFECTING, DIRECTLY OR
 INDIRECTLY, A COMMERCIAL  TRANSACTION.  COMMERCIAL  PURPOSES  SHALL  NOT
 INCLUDE  ENGAGING IN SPEECH THAT STATE OR FEDERAL COURTS HAVE RECOGNIZED
 AS NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, POLITICAL SPEECH
 AND JOURNALISM.
  (I) "CONSUMER" MEANS A NATURAL PERSON WHO IS A RESIDENT OF  THE  STATE
 OF NEW YORK.
  (J) "DE-IDENTIFIED" MEANS INFORMATION THAT CANNOT REASONABLY IDENTIFY,
 RELATE  TO, DESCRIBE, BE CAPABLE OF BEING ASSOCIATED WITH, OR BE LINKED,
 DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, TO A PARTICULAR CONSUMER, PROVIDED THAT A  BUSI-
 NESS THAT USES DE-IDENTIFIED INFORMATION:
  (I)  TAKES  REASONABLE  MEASURES TO ENSURE THAT THE DATA IS DE-IDENTI-
 FIED;
  (II) PUBLICLY COMMITS TO MAINTAIN AND USE THE DATA IN A  DE-IDENTIFIED
 FASHION AND NOT TO ATTEMPT TO RE-IDENTIFY THE DATA; AND
  (III) CONTRACTUALLY PROHIBITS DOWNSTREAM RECIPIENTS FROM ATTEMPTING TO
 RE-IDENTIFY THE DATA.
  (K)  "DESIGNATED  METHODS  FOR  SUBMITTING  REQUESTS"  MEANS A MAILING
 ADDRESS, EMAIL ADDRESS, INTERNET WEB PAGE, INTERNET  WEB  PORTAL,  TOLL-
 FREE  TELEPHONE NUMBER, OR OTHER APPLICABLE CONTACT INFORMATION, WHEREBY
 CONSUMERS MAY SUBMIT A REQUEST UNDER THIS ARTICLE, AND ANY NEW,  CONSUM-
 ER-FRIENDLY  MEANS OF CONTACTING A BUSINESS, AS APPROVED BY THE ATTORNEY
 GENERAL PURSUANT TO SECTION SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-N OF THIS ARTICLE.
  (L) "DEVICE" MEANS ANY PHYSICAL OBJECT THAT IS CAPABLE  OF  CONNECTING
 TO THE INTERNET, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, OR TO ANOTHER DEVICE.
  (M) "HEALTH INSURANCE INFORMATION" MEANS A CONSUMER'S INSURANCE POLICY
 NUMBER  OR  SUBSCRIBER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER, ANY UNIQUE IDENTIFIER USED
 BY A HEALTH INSURER TO IDENTIFY THE CONSUMER, OR ANY INFORMATION IN  THE
 CONSUMER'S  APPLICATION  AND  CLAIMS  HISTORY,  INCLUDING  ANY  APPEALS
 RECORDS, IF THE INFORMATION  IS  LINKED  OR  REASONABLY  LINKABLE  TO  A
 CONSUMER  OR HOUSEHOLD, INCLUDING VIA A DEVICE, BY A BUSINESS OR SERVICE
 PROVIDER.
  (N) "INFER" OR "INFERENCE" MEANS THE DERIVATION OF INFORMATION,  DATA,
 ASSUMPTIONS,  OR  CONCLUSIONS FROM FACTS, EVIDENCE, OR ANOTHER SOURCE OF
 INFORMATION OR DATA.
  (O) "PERSON" MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL, PROPRIETORSHIP,  FIRM,  PARTNERSHIP,
 JOINT  VENTURE, SYNDICATE, BUSINESS TRUST, COMPANY, CORPORATION, LIMITED
 LIABILITY COMPANY, ASSOCIATION, COMMITTEE, AND ANY OTHER ORGANIZATION OR
 GROUP OF PERSONS ACTING IN CONCERT.
  (P) "PERSONAL INFORMATION" MEANS INFORMATION THAT IDENTIFIES OR  COULD
 REASONABLY  BE LINKED, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, WITH A PARTICULAR CONSUM-
 ER, HOUSEHOLD, OR CONSUMER  DEVICE.  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  SHALL  NOT
 INCLUDE  PUBLICLY  AVAILABLE INFORMATION, INFORMATION THAT IS DE-IDENTI-
 FIED, OR AGGREGATE CONSUMER INFORMATION.
  (Q) "PUBLICLY AVAILABLE"  MEANS  INFORMATION  THAT  IS  LAWFULLY  MADE
 AVAILABLE  FROM  FEDERAL,  STATE,  OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT RECORDS. PUBLICLY
 AVAILABLE DOES NOT MEAN INFORMATION COLLECTED  BY  A  BUSINESS  ABOUT  A
 CONSUMER WITHOUT THE CONSUMER'S KNOWLEDGE.
  (R) "SERVICE" OR "SERVICES" MEANS WORK, LABOR, AND SERVICES, INCLUDING
 SERVICES  FURNISHED IN CONNECTION WITH THE PRODUCTION, SALE OR REPAIR OF
 GOODS.
  (S) "SERVICE PROVIDER" MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP,  PART-
 NERSHIP,  LIMITED  LIABILITY COMPANY, CORPORATION, ASSOCIATION, OR OTHER
 LEGAL ENTITY THAT IS ORGANIZED OR OPERATED FOR THE PROFIT  OR  FINANCIAL
 BENEFIT  OF ITS SHAREHOLDERS OR OTHER OWNERS, THAT PROCESSES INFORMATION
 S. 5555  6
 
 ON BEHALF OF A BUSINESS AND TO WHICH SUCH BUSINESS DISCLOSES  A  CONSUM-
 ER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION FOR AN OPERATIONAL PURPOSE PURSUANT TO A WRIT-
 TEN  OR  ELECTRONIC  CONTRACT,  PROVIDED THAT THE CONTRACT PROHIBITS THE
 ENTITY  RECEIVING  THE  INFORMATION FROM RETAINING, USING, OR DISCLOSING
 THE PERSONAL INFORMATION FOR ANY PURPOSE OTHER  THAN  FOR  THE  SPECIFIC
 PURPOSE  OF  PERFORMING  THE SERVICES SPECIFIED IN THE CONTRACT FOR SUCH
 BUSINESS, OR AS OTHERWISE PERMITTED BY THIS ARTICLE, INCLUDING A  PROHI-
 BITION ON RETAINING, USING, OR DISCLOSING THE PERSONAL INFORMATION FOR A
 COMMERCIAL  PURPOSE  OTHER  THAN PROVIDING THE SERVICES SPECIFIED IN THE
 CONTRACT WITH SUCH BUSINESS.
  (T) "VERIFIABLE CONSUMER REQUEST" MEANS A REQUEST THAT IS  MADE  BY  A
 CONSUMER, BY A CONSUMER ON BEHALF OF THE CONSUMER'S MINOR CHILD, OR BY A
 NATURAL  PERSON  OR  A  PERSON  REGISTERED  WITH THE SECRETARY OF STATE,
 AUTHORIZED BY THE CONSUMER TO ACT ON THE CONSUMER'S BEHALF, AND THAT THE
 BUSINESS CAN REASONABLY VERIFY. A BUSINESS SHALL  NOT  BE  OBLIGATED  TO
 PROVIDE  ANY  PERSONAL INFORMATION TO A CONSUMER IF SUCH BUSINESS CANNOT
 VERIFY THAT THE CONSUMER MAKING THE REQUEST IS THE CONSUMER  ABOUT  WHOM
 SUCH  BUSINESS HAS COLLECTED PERSONAL INFORMATION OR IS A PERSON AUTHOR-
 IZED BY THE CONSUMER TO ACT ON SUCH CONSUMER'S BEHALF.
  (U) "THIRD PARTY" MEANS A PERSON OR BUSINESS THAT IS NOT  ANY  OF  THE
 FOLLOWING:
  (I)  THE  BUSINESS  THAT  COLLECTS PERSONAL INFORMATION FROM CONSUMERS
 UNDER THIS ARTICLE; OR
  (II) A PERSON TO WHOM THE BUSINESS  DISCLOSES  A  CONSUMER'S  PERSONAL
 INFORMATION  FOR  AN OPERATIONAL PURPOSE PURSUANT TO A WRITTEN CONTRACT,
 PROVIDED THAT THE CONTRACT:
  (1) PROHIBITS THE PERSON RECEIVING THE PERSONAL INFORMATION FROM:
  (A) SELLING THE PERSONAL INFORMATION;
  (B) RETAINING, USING, OR DISCLOSING THE PERSONAL INFORMATION  FOR  ANY
 PURPOSE  OTHER  THAN FOR THE SPECIFIC PURPOSE OF PERFORMING THE SERVICES
 SPECIFIED IN THE CONTRACT, INCLUDING RETAINING, USING, OR DISCLOSING THE
 PERSONAL INFORMATION FOR A COMMERCIAL PURPOSE OTHER THAN  PROVIDING  THE
 SERVICES SPECIFIED IN THE CONTRACT; AND
  (C)  RETAINING,  USING,  OR  DISCLOSING THE INFORMATION OUTSIDE OF THE
 DIRECT BUSINESS RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE PERSON AND THE BUSINESS; AND
  (2) INCLUDES A CERTIFICATION MADE BY THE PERSON RECEIVING THE PERSONAL
 INFORMATION THAT THE PERSON UNDERSTANDS THE RESTRICTIONS IN  CLAUSE  ONE
 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH AND WILL COMPLY WITH SUCH RESTRICTIONS.
  2.  FOR REFERENCES TO A CATEGORY OR CATEGORIES OF PERSONAL INFORMATION
 REQUIRED TO BE DISCLOSED PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE:
  (A) "PROCESSING" MEANS ANY OPERATION OR SET  OF  OPERATIONS  THAT  ARE
 PERFORMED  ON  PERSONAL DATA OR ON SETS OF PERSONAL DATA, WHETHER OR NOT
 BY AUTOMATED MEANS.
  (B) "RESEARCH" MEANS SCIENTIFIC AND SYSTEMATIC STUDY AND  OBSERVATION,
 INCLUDING  BASIC  RESEARCH  OR  APPLIED  RESEARCH  THAT IS IN THE PUBLIC
 INTEREST AND THAT ADHERES TO ALL OTHER  APPLICABLE  ETHICS  AND  PRIVACY
 LAWS  OR  STUDIES CONDUCTED IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST IN THE AREA OF PUBLIC
 HEALTH. RESEARCH WITH PERSONAL INFORMATION THAT MAY HAVE BEEN  COLLECTED
 FROM  A  CONSUMER  IN  THE  COURSE OF THE CONSUMER'S INTERACTIONS WITH A
 BUSINESS' SERVICE OR DEVICE FOR OTHER PURPOSES SHALL BE:
  (I) COMPATIBLE WITH AN OPERATIONAL  PURPOSE  FOR  WHICH  THE  PERSONAL
 INFORMATION WAS COLLECTED;
  (II)  SUBSEQUENTLY  DE-IDENTIFIED,  OR IN THE AGGREGATE, SUCH THAT THE
 INFORMATION CANNOT REASONABLY IDENTIFY, RELATE TO, DESCRIBE, BE  CAPABLE
 OF  BEING  ASSOCIATED  WITH,  OR BE LINKED, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, TO A
 PARTICULAR CONSUMER;
 S. 5555  7
 
  (III) MADE SUBJECT TO TECHNICAL SAFEGUARDS TO  PREVENT  RE-IDENTIFICA-
 TION OF THE CONSUMER TO WHOM THE INFORMATION MAY PERTAIN;
  (IV) SUBJECT TO BUSINESS PROCESSES THAT SPECIFICALLY PROHIBIT RE-IDEN-
 TIFICATION OF THE INFORMATION;
  (V)  MADE SUBJECT TO BUSINESS PROCESSES TO PREVENT INADVERTENT RELEASE
 OF DE-IDENTIFIED INFORMATION;
  (VI) PROTECTED FROM ANY RE-IDENTIFICATION ATTEMPTS;
  (VII) USED SOLELY FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES THAT ARE COMPATIBLE  WITH  THE
 CONTEXT IN WHICH THE PERSONAL INFORMATION WAS COLLECTED;
  (VIII) NOT BE USED FOR ANY COMMERCIAL PURPOSE; AND
  (IX)  SUBJECTED  BY THE BUSINESS CONDUCTING THE RESEARCH TO ADDITIONAL
 SECURITY CONTROLS THAT LIMIT ACCESS TO THE RESEARCH DATA TO  ONLY  THOSE
 INDIVIDUALS  IN  A  BUSINESS  AS ARE NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE RESEARCH
 PURPOSE.
  (C) (I) "SELL," "SELLING," "SALE," OR "SOLD," MEANS SELLING,  RENTING,
 RELEASING, DISCLOSING, DISSEMINATING, MAKING AVAILABLE, TRANSFERRING, OR
 OTHERWISE  COMMUNICATING  ORALLY,  IN WRITING, OR BY ELECTRONIC OR OTHER
 MEANS, A CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION  BY  THE  BUSINESS  TO  ANOTHER
 BUSINESS OR A THIRD PARTY FOR MONETARY OR OTHER VALUABLE CONSIDERATION.
  (II)  FOR  PURPOSES OF THIS ARTICLE, A BUSINESS DOES NOT SELL PERSONAL
 INFORMATION WHEN:
  (1) A CONSUMER USES OR DIRECTS THE BUSINESS TO INTENTIONALLY  DISCLOSE
 PERSONAL INFORMATION OR USES THE BUSINESS TO INTENTIONALLY INTERACT WITH
 A THIRD PARTY, PROVIDED SUCH THIRD PARTY DOES NOT ALSO SELL THE PERSONAL
 INFORMATION,  UNLESS  SUCH  DISCLOSURE  WOULD  BE  CONSISTENT  WITH  THE
 PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE. AN INTENTIONAL INTERACTION OCCURS  WHEN  THE
 CONSUMER  INTENDS  TO  INTERACT  WITH  THE  THIRD PARTY, VIA ONE OR MORE
 DELIBERATE INTERACTIONS.  HOVERING OVER, MUTING, PAUSING, OR  CLOSING  A
 GIVEN  PIECE  OF  CONTENT  SHALL  NOT  CONSTITUTE A CONSUMER'S INTENT TO
 INTERACT WITH A THIRD PARTY;
  (2) THE BUSINESS USES OR DISCLOSES AN IDENTIFIER FOR  A  CONSUMER  WHO
 HAS OPTED OUT OF THE SALE OF THE CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION FOR THE
 PURPOSES  OF  ALERTING  THIRD PARTIES THAT THE CONSUMER HAS OPTED OUT OF
 THE SALE OF THE CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION;
  (3) THE BUSINESS USES OR DISCLOSES PERSONAL INFORMATION OF A  CONSUMER
 WITH  A  SERVICE  PROVIDER  THAT  IS NECESSARY TO PERFORM AN OPERATIONAL
 PURPOSE AND THE BUSINESS HAS PROVIDED NOTICE THAT INFORMATION BEING USED
 OR DISCLOSED IN ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS  CONSISTENT  WITH  SECTION  SIX
 HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-I OF THIS ARTICLE; OR
  (4)  THE  BUSINESS TRANSFERS TO A THIRD PARTY THE PERSONAL INFORMATION
 OF A CONSUMER AS AN ASSET THAT IS PART OF A MERGER,  ACQUISITION,  BANK-
 RUPTCY, OR OTHER TRANSACTION IN WHICH THE THIRD PARTY ASSUMES CONTROL OF
 ALL  OR  PART  OF  THE  BUSINESS,  PROVIDED  THAT INFORMATION IS USED OR
 DISCLOSED CONSISTENTLY WITH THIS ARTICLE. A THIRD PARTY  MAY  NOT  MATE-
 RIALLY  ALTER  HOW  IT  USES  OR DISCLOSES THE PERSONAL INFORMATION OF A
 CONSUMER IN A MANNER THAT IS MATERIALLY INCONSISTENT WITH  THE  PROMISES
 MADE  AT THE TIME OF COLLECTION, UNLESS IT FIRST OBTAINS OPT-IN CONSENT,
 AS SET FORTH IN THIS ARTICLE.
  § 676-A. TRANSPARENCY OF THE COLLECTION, USE, RETENTION,  AND  SHARING
 OF  PERSONAL  INFORMATION.  ANY  BUSINESS  THAT  COLLECTS  A  CONSUMER'S
 PERSONAL INFORMATION SHALL DISCLOSE THE  FOLLOWING  INFORMATION  IN  ITS
 ONLINE PRIVACY POLICY OR POLICIES, IF THE BUSINESS HAS AN ONLINE PRIVACY
 POLICY, AND UPDATE SUCH INFORMATION AT LEAST ONCE EVERY TWELVE MONTHS:
  1.  A  DESCRIPTION  OF  A  CONSUMER'S  RIGHTS PURSUANT TO SECTIONS SIX
 HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-B, SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-D, SIX  HUNDRED  SEVENTY-
 SIX-E,  SIX  HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-F AND SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-G OF THIS
 S. 5555  8
 
 ARTICLE AND ONE OR  MORE  DESIGNATED  METHODS  FOR  SUBMITTING  REQUESTS
 PURSUANT  TO  SECTIONS  SIX  HUNDRED  SEVENTY-SIX-C,  SIX  HUNDRED
 SEVENTY-SIX-D, AND SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-E OF THIS ARTICLE;
  2.  A  DESCRIPTION  OF THE PERSONAL INFORMATION SUCH BUSINESS COLLECTS
 ABOUT CONSUMERS;
  3. THE CATEGORIES OF SOURCES FROM WHICH THE  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  IS
 COLLECTED;
  4. A DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODS SUCH BUSINESS USES TO COLLECT PERSONAL
 INFORMATION;
  5.  THE  SPECIFIC  PURPOSES  FOR  COLLECTING, DISCLOSING, OR RETAINING
 PERSONAL INFORMATION;
  6. A DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  IT  DISCLOSES  ABOUT
 CONSUMERS,  OR  IF  THE  BUSINESS  DOES NOT DISCLOSE CONSUMERS' PERSONAL
 INFORMATION, THE BUSINESS SHALL DISCLOSE SUCH FACT;
  7. THE CATEGORIES OF THIRD PARTIES  WITH  WHOM  SUCH  BUSINESS  SHARES
 PERSONAL  INFORMATION WITH, OR IF THE BUSINESS DOES NOT DISCLOSE CONSUM-
 ERS' PERSONAL INFORMATION TO THIRD PARTIES, THE BUSINESS SHALL  DISCLOSE
 SUCH FACT;
  8.  THE CATEGORIES OF SERVICE PROVIDERS WITH WHOM SUCH BUSINESS SHARES
 PERSONAL INFORMATION WITH, OR IF THE BUSINESS DOES NOT DISCLOSE  CONSUM-
 ERS'  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  TO  SERVICE  PROVIDERS,  THE BUSINESS SHALL
 DISCLOSE SUCH FACT;
  9. A DESCRIPTION OF THE LENGTH OF TIME FOR WHICH PERSONAL  INFORMATION
 IS RETAINED; AND
  10.  IF  PERSONAL  DATA  IS  DE-IDENTIFIED  SUCH  THAT IT IS NO LONGER
 CONSIDERED PERSONAL INFORMATION  BUT  SUBSEQUENTLY  RETAINED,  USED,  OR
 SHARED  BY THE BUSINESS, A DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD OR METHODS OF DE-I-
 DENTIFICATION.
  § 676-B. FAIR COLLECTION AND USE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION.  1.  SUBJECT
 TO  SECTION  SIX  HUNDRED  SEVENTY-SIX-F OF THIS ARTICLE A BUSINESS THAT
 COLLECTS A CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION SHALL  LIMIT  ITS  COLLECTION
 AND  SHARING  OF  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  WITH  THIRD  PARTIES TO WHAT IS
 REASONABLY NECESSARY TO PROVIDE A SERVICE OR CONDUCT AN ACTIVITY THAT  A
 CONSUMER  HAS REQUESTED OR IS REASONABLY NECESSARY FOR SECURITY OR FRAUD
 PREVENTION, AND SHALL REQUIRE ANY SUCH THIRD PARTY TO EXERCISE CARE OVER
 THE CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION CONSISTENT WITH THE  ORIGINAL  BUSI-
 NESS'S OBLIGATIONS AS BAILEE OF SUCH INFORMATION.
  2.  SUBJECT  TO  SECTION  SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-F OF THIS ARTICLE, A
 BUSINESS THAT COLLECTS A CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION SHALL BE  OBLI-
 GATED  TO EXERCISE REASONABLE CARE WITH RESPECT TO THE COLLECTION, STOR-
 AGE, AND USE OF THAT INFORMATION, CONSISTENT WITH ITS OBLIGATIONS  AS  A
 BAILEE, AND SHALL LIMIT ITS USE AND RETENTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION TO
 WHAT IS REASONABLY NECESSARY TO PROVIDE A SERVICE OR CONDUCT AN ACTIVITY
 THAT A CONSUMER HAS REQUESTED OR A RELATED OPERATIONAL PURPOSE, PROVIDED
 HOWEVER  THAT  DATA  COLLECTED  OR RETAINED SOLELY FOR SECURITY OR FRAUD
 PREVENTION MAY NOT BE USED FOR RELATED OPERATIONAL PURPOSES.
  § 676-C. DELETION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION. 1. A  CONSUMER  SHALL  HAVE
 THE  RIGHT  TO  REQUEST  THAT A BUSINESS DELETE ANY PERSONAL INFORMATION
 ABOUT SUCH CONSUMER WHICH THE BUSINESS HAS COLLECTED FROM THE CONSUMER.
  2. A BUSINESS THAT COLLECTS PERSONAL INFORMATION ABOUT CONSUMERS SHALL
 DISCLOSE, PURSUANT TO THE NOTICE REQUIREMENTS  OF  SECTION  SIX  HUNDRED
 SEVENTY-SIX-I  OF  THIS  ARTICLE,  THE  CONSUMER'S RIGHTS TO REQUEST THE
 DELETION OF THE CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION.
  3. A BUSINESS THAT RECEIVES  A  VERIFIABLE  CONSUMER  REQUEST  FROM  A
 CONSUMER  TO  DELETE  THE  CONSUMER'S  PERSONAL  INFORMATION PURSUANT TO
 SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION SHALL  DELETE  THE  CONSUMER'S  PERSONAL
 S. 5555  9
 
 INFORMATION  FROM ITS RECORDS AND DIRECT ANY SERVICE PROVIDERS TO DELETE
 THE CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION FROM THEIR RECORDS.
  4.  A  BUSINESS  OR A SERVICE PROVIDER SHALL NOT BE REQUIRED TO COMPLY
 WITH A CONSUMER'S REQUEST TO DELETE THE CONSUMER'S PERSONAL  INFORMATION
 IF:
  (A)  SUCH  RETENTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION IS REASONABLY ANTICIPATED
 WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF A BUSINESS'S ONGOING  BUSINESS  RELATIONSHIP  WITH
 THE CONSUMER; OR
  (B)  IT  IS NECESSARY FOR THE BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER TO MAINTAIN
 THE CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION IN ORDER TO:
  (I) COMPLETE THE TRANSACTION FOR WHICH THE  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  WAS
 COLLECTED,  PROVIDE  A  GOOD  OR  SERVICE  REQUESTED BY THE CONSUMER, OR
 OTHERWISE PERFORM A CONTRACT BETWEEN THE BUSINESS AND THE CONSUMER;
  (II) DETECT OR RESPOND TO SECURITY INCIDENTS,  PROTECT  AGAINST  MALI-
 CIOUS,  DECEPTIVE,  FRAUDULENT,  OR ILLEGAL ACTIVITY, OR PROSECUTE THOSE
 RESPONSIBLE FOR THAT ACTIVITY;
  (III) DEBUG  TO  IDENTIFY  AND  REPAIR  ERRORS  THAT  IMPAIR  EXISTING
 INTENDED FUNCTIONALITY;
  (IV)  EXERCISE  FREE  SPEECH,  ENSURE THE RIGHT OF ANOTHER CONSUMER TO
 EXERCISE HIS OR HER RIGHT OF FREE SPEECH;
  (V) ENGAGE IN  PUBLIC  OR  PEER-REVIEWED  SCIENTIFIC,  HISTORICAL,  OR
 STATISTICAL  RESEARCH  IN  THE PUBLIC INTEREST THAT ADHERES TO ALL OTHER
 APPLICABLE ETHICS AND PRIVACY LAWS, WHEN THE BUSINESSES' DELETION OF THE
 INFORMATION IS LIKELY TO  RENDER  IMPOSSIBLE  OR  SERIOUSLY  IMPAIR  THE
 ACHIEVEMENT  OF  SUCH  RESEARCH,  IF  THE CONSUMER HAS PROVIDED INFORMED
 CONSENT; OR
  (VI) COMPLY WITH A LEGAL OBLIGATION.
  § 676-D. ACCESS TO RETAINED PERSONAL INFORMATION.  1.  IF  A  BUSINESS
 COLLECTS  PERSONAL INFORMATION ABOUT A CONSUMER, THE CONSUMER SHALL HAVE
 THE RIGHT TO ASK THE BUSINESS FOR THE  FOLLOWING  INFORMATION,  AND  THE
 BUSINESS SHALL HAVE THE DUTY TO PROVIDE IT, PROMPTLY AND FREE OF CHARGE,
 UPON RECEIPT OF A VERIFIABLE REQUEST:
  (A)  THE  SPECIFIC  PIECES  OF  PERSONAL INFORMATION THAT THE BUSINESS
 RETAINS ABOUT THAT CONSUMER;
  (B) THE  SPECIFIC  SOURCES  FROM  WHICH  THE  BUSINESS  COLLECTED  THE
 PERSONAL INFORMATION; AND
  (C) ITS PURPOSE FOR COLLECTING THE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
  2.  WHEN  A  BUSINESS  RECEIVES  A  VERIFIABLE CONSUMER REQUEST FROM A
 CONSUMER FOR THE SPECIFIC PIECES OF  THEIR  PERSONAL  INFORMATION,  SUCH
 BUSINESS  SHALL  DISCLOSE  SUCH  INFORMATION IN AN ELECTRONIC, PORTABLE,
 MACHINE-READABLE, AND READILY-USEABLE FORMAT OR FORMATS THAT  ALLOW  THE
 CONSUMER TO UNDERSTAND SUCH INFORMATION AND TO TRANSMIT SUCH INFORMATION
 TO ANOTHER ENTITY WITHOUT HINDRANCE.
  §  676-E.  ACCESS TO DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION. IF A BUSINESS
 DISCLOSES PERSONAL INFORMATION ABOUT A CONSUMER TO A  THIRD  PARTY,  THE
 CONSUMER  SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT TO REQUEST THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION FROM
 THE BUSINESS, AND SUCH BUSINESS SHALL  HAVE  THE  DUTY  TO  PROVIDE  IT,
 PROMPTLY AND FREE OF CHARGE, UPON RECEIPT OF A VERIFIABLE REQUEST:
  1.  THE CATEGORIES OF PERSONAL INFORMATION THAT THE BUSINESS DISCLOSED
 ABOUT THE CONSUMER, AND THE CATEGORIES OF  THIRD  PARTIES  TO  WHOM  THE
 PERSONAL  INFORMATION WAS DISCLOSED, BY CATEGORY OF PERSONAL INFORMATION
 FOR EACH CATEGORY OF THIRD PARTY; AND
  2. THE SPECIFIC THIRD PARTIES TO WHOM  THE  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  WAS
 DISCLOSED.
  §  676-F.  CONSENT  TO  ADDITIONAL  COLLECTION  OR SHARING OF PERSONAL
 INFORMATION. 1. OTHER THAN AS DESCRIBED IN SECTION SIX HUNDRED  SEVENTY-
 S. 5555  10
 
 SIX-B  OF  THIS ARTICLE, A BUSINESS SHALL NOT COLLECT OR SHARE A CONSUM-
 ER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION UNLESS THE CONSUMER HAS AFFIRMATIVELY  AUTHOR-
 IZED  THE  COLLECTION  OR  DISCLOSURE.  THIS RIGHT TO COLLECT OR SHARE A
 CONSUMER'S  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  MAY  BE  REFERRED  TO AS THE RIGHT TO
 "OPT-IN CONSENT".
  2. ANY PERSONAL INFORMATION OF A CONSUMER COLLECTED  OR  SHARED  BY  A
 BUSINESS UPON THE AFFIRMATIVE AUTHORIZATION OF THE CONSUMER SHALL REMAIN
 THE  PROPERTY  OF  SUCH  CONSUMER, AND THE BUSINESS SHALL BE REQUIRED TO
 EXERCISE REASONABLE CARE IN THE COLLECTION AND  SHARING  OF  SUCH  DATA,
 CONSISTENT WITH ITS OBLIGATIONS TOWARDS THE CONSUMER AS BAILEE OF HIS OR
 HER PERSONAL INFORMATION.
  3.  A  BUSINESS  SHALL REQUEST A USER'S OPT-IN CONSENT SEPARATELY FROM
 ANY OTHER PERMISSION OR CONSENT, WITH THE OPTION TO DECLINE  CONSENT  AT
 LEAST AS PROMINENT AS THE OPTION TO PROVIDE CONSENT.
  4.  IF  A  CONSUMER  DECLINES  TO  PROVIDE THEIR OPT-IN CONSENT TO THE
 DISCLOSURE OF THEIR PERSONAL INFORMATION, A BUSINESS SHALL  REFRAIN  FOR
 AT LEAST TWELVE MONTHS BEFORE AGAIN REQUESTING THAT THE CONSUMER PROVIDE
 THEIR OPT-IN CONSENT TO THE DISCLOSURE OF THEIR PERSONAL INFORMATION.
  5.  A BUSINESS MAY MAKE AVAILABLE A SETTING OR OTHER USER CONTROL THAT
 THE CONSUMER MAY AFFIRMATIVELY ACCESS IN ORDER TO CONSENT TO  ADDITIONAL
 DATA COLLECTION OR SHARING.
  6.  A  BUSINESS THAT OBTAINS A CONSUMER'S OPT-IN CONSENT TO COLLECT OR
 DISCLOSE THEIR PERSONAL  INFORMATION  PURSUANT  TO  THIS  SECTION  SHALL
 PROVIDE CONSUMERS THE ABILITY TO WITHDRAW SUCH CONSENT THROUGH A READILY
 USABLE AND AUTOMATED MEANS AT ANY TIME.
  §  676-G. NO DISCRIMINATION BY A BUSINESS AGAINST A CONSUMER FOR EXER-
 CISE OF RIGHTS. A BUSINESS SHALL NOT  DISCRIMINATE  AGAINST  A  CONSUMER
 BECAUSE  THE  CONSUMER EXERCISED ANY OF THE CONSUMER'S RIGHTS UNDER THIS
 ARTICLE OR DOES NOT PROVIDE CONSENT TO  ADDITIONAL  DATA  COLLECTION  OR
 SHARING  UNDER SECTION SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-F OF THIS ARTICLE INCLUD-
 ING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, BY:
  1. DENYING GOODS OR SERVICES TO THE CONSUMER;
  2. CHARGING DIFFERENT PRICES OR RATES FOR GOODS OR SERVICES, INCLUDING
 THROUGH THE USE OF DISCOUNTS OR OTHER BENEFITS OR IMPOSING PENALTIES;
  3. PROVIDING A DIFFERENT LEVEL OR QUALITY OF GOODS OR SERVICES TO  THE
 CONSUMER; OR
  4. SUGGESTING THAT THE CONSUMER WILL RECEIVE A DIFFERENT PRICE OR RATE
 FOR  GOODS  OR  SERVICES  OR  A  DIFFERENT  LEVEL OR QUALITY OF GOODS OR
 SERVICES.
  § 676-H. REASONABLE SECURITY. 1. A BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER  SHALL
 IMPLEMENT  AND  MAINTAIN  REASONABLE  SECURITY PROCEDURES AND PRACTICES,
 INCLUDING ADMINISTRATIVE, PHYSICAL, AND TECHNICAL SAFEGUARDS,  APPROPRI-
 ATE  TO  THE  NATURE  OF  THE INFORMATION AND THE PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE
 PERSONAL INFORMATION WILL BE USED, TO PROTECT CONSUMERS' PERSONAL INFOR-
 MATION  FROM  UNAUTHORIZED  USE,  DISCLOSURE,  ACCESS,  DESTRUCTION,  OR
 MODIFICATION.
  2. A BUSINESS OR SERVICE PROVIDER MAY EMPLOY ANY LAWFUL SECURITY MEAS-
 URES  THAT  ALLOW  IT  TO COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS SET FORTH IN THIS
 SECTION.
  § 676-I. BUSINESS IMPLEMENTATION OF DUTIES. 1. A BUSINESS SHALL:
  (A) MAKE AVAILABLE TO CONSUMERS TWO OR  MORE  DESIGNATED  METHODS  FOR
 SUBMITTING  REQUESTS PURSUANT TO SECTIONS SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-C, SIX
 HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-D, AND SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-E  OF  THIS  ARTICLE,
 INCLUDING,  AT A MINIMUM, A TELEPHONE NUMBER, AND, IF THE BUSINESS MAIN-
 TAINS AN INTERNET WEB SITE, A WEB SITE ADDRESS;
 S. 5555  11
 
  (B) DISCLOSE AND DELIVER THE REQUIRED INFORMATION TO A  CONSUMER  FREE
 OF  CHARGE  WITHIN  FORTY-FIVE  DAYS  OF RECEIVING A VERIFIABLE CONSUMER
 REQUEST. A BUSINESS SHALL TAKE STEPS TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE REQUEST IS
 A VERIFIABLE CONSUMER REQUEST FROM THE  IDENTIFIED  CONSUMER.  THE  TIME
 PERIOD  MAY  BE  EXTENDED ONCE BY FORTY-FIVE DAYS WHEN REASONABLY NECES-
 SARY, PROVIDED THE CONSUMER IS PROVIDED NOTICE OF THE  EXTENSION  WITHIN
 THE  FIRST  FORTY-FIVE DAY PERIOD. THE DISCLOSURE SHALL COVER THE TWELVE
 MONTH PERIOD PRECEDING THE REQUEST. IT SHALL BE  DELIVERED  THROUGH  THE
 CONSUMER'S  ACCOUNT  WITH  THE  BUSINESS,  IF  THE CONSUMER MAINTAINS AN
 ACCOUNT WITH THE BUSINESS, OR BY MAIL OR ELECTRONICALLY AT  THE  CONSUM-
 ER'S OPTION, IF THE CONSUMER DOES NOT MAINTAIN AN ACCOUNT WITH THE BUSI-
 NESS.  THE  BUSINESS SHALL NOT REQUIRE THE CONSUMER TO CREATE AN ACCOUNT
 WITH THE BUSINESS IN ORDER TO MAKE A VERIFIABLE REQUEST;
  (C) ENSURE THAT ALL  INDIVIDUALS  RESPONSIBLE  FOR  HANDLING  CONSUMER
 INQUIRIES  ABOUT  THE  BUSINESS'S  PRIVACY  PRACTICES  OR THE BUSINESS'S
 COMPLIANCE WITH THIS ARTICLE ARE INFORMED OF ALL  REQUIREMENTS  IN  THIS
 ARTICLE,  AND  HOW  TO DIRECT CONSUMERS TO EXERCISE THEIR RIGHTS IN THIS
 ARTICLE; AND
  (D) LIMIT THE USE OF  ANY  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  COLLECTED  FROM  THE
 CONSUMER  IN CONNECTION WITH A BUSINESS'S VERIFICATION OF THE CONSUMER'S
 REQUEST SOLELY FOR THE PURPOSES OF VERIFICATION.
  2. A BUSINESS SHALL  NOT  BE  OBLIGATED  TO  PROVIDE  THE  INFORMATION
 REQUIRED  BY SECTIONS SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-D AND SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-
 SIX-E OF THIS ARTICLE TO THE SAME CONSUMER MORE THAN TWICE IN  A  TWELVE
 MONTH PERIOD.
  §  676-J. EXCEPTIONS. 1. THE OBLIGATIONS IMPOSED ON BUSINESSES BY THIS
 ARTICLE SHALL NOT RESTRICT A BUSINESS'S OR  SERVICE  PROVIDER'S  ABILITY
 TO:
  (A) COMPLY WITH FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL LAWS;
  (B)  COMPLY  WITH  A  CIVIL, CRIMINAL, OR REGULATORY INQUIRY, INVESTI-
 GATION, SUBPOENA, OR SUMMONS BY FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL AUTHORITIES;
  (C) COOPERATE WITH LAW  ENFORCEMENT  AGENCIES  CONCERNING  CONDUCT  OR
 ACTIVITY  THAT THE BUSINESS, SERVICE PROVIDER, OR THIRD PARTY REASONABLY
 AND IN GOOD FAITH BELIEVES MAY VIOLATE FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL LAW;
  (D) EXERCISE OR DEFEND LEGAL CLAIMS;
  (E) COLLECT, USE, RETAIN, SELL, OR DISCLOSE CONSUMER INFORMATION  THAT
 IS DE-IDENTIFIED OR IN THE AGGREGATE; OR
  (F)  COLLECT OR SELL A CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMATION IF EVERY ASPECT
 OF THAT COMMERCIAL CONDUCT TAKES PLACE WHOLLY OUTSIDE OF THE STATE.  FOR
 PURPOSES  OF THIS SECTION, COMMERCIAL CONDUCT TAKES PLACE WHOLLY OUTSIDE
 OF THE STATE IF THE BUSINESS COLLECTED INFORMATION  WHILE  THE  CONSUMER
 WAS OUTSIDE OF THE STATE, NO PART OF THE SALE OF THE CONSUMER'S PERSONAL
 INFORMATION OCCURRED IN THE STATE, AND NO PERSONAL INFORMATION COLLECTED
 WHILE  THE  CONSUMER  WAS IN THE STATE IS SOLD. THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL NOT
 PERMIT A BUSINESS FROM STORING, INCLUDING ON A DEVICE, PERSONAL INFORMA-
 TION ABOUT A CONSUMER WHEN SUCH  CONSUMER  IS  IN  THE  STATE  AND  THEN
 COLLECTING  SUCH  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  WHEN  SUCH  CONSUMER AND STORED
 PERSONAL INFORMATION IS OUTSIDE OF THE STATE.
  2. NOTHING IN THIS ARTICLE SHALL REQUIRE  A  BUSINESS  TO  VIOLATE  AN
 EVIDENTIARY  PRIVILEGE  UNDER STATE OR FEDERAL LAW OR PREVENT A BUSINESS
 FROM PROVIDING THE PERSONAL INFORMATION OF A CONSUMER WHO IS COVERED  BY
 AN  EVIDENTIARY PRIVILEGE UNDER STATE OR FEDERAL LAW AS PART OF A PRIVI-
 LEGED COMMUNICATION.
  3. THIS ARTICLE SHALL NOT APPLY TO ANY OF THE FOLLOWING:
  (A) MEDICAL INFORMATION GOVERNED BY PART 2.6 OF THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF
 MEDICAL  INFORMATION  ACT  OR  PROTECTED  HEALTH  INFORMATION  THAT  IS
 S. 5555  12
 
 COLLECTED  BY  A  COVERED  ENTITY  OR BUSINESS ASSOCIATE GOVERNED BY THE
 PRIVACY, SECURITY, AND BREACH NOTIFICATION RULES ISSUED  OR  ESTABLISHED
 BY  THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, 45 C.F.R.
 PARTS  160  AND 164, THE HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY
 ACT OF 1996, OR THE HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR ECONOMIC AND CLIN-
 ICAL HEALTH ACT;
  (B) A PROVIDER OF HEALTH CARE GOVERNED BY PART 2.6  OF  THE  CONFIDEN-
 TIALITY  OF  MEDICAL INFORMATION ACT OR A COVERED ENTITY GOVERNED BY THE
 PRIVACY, SECURITY, AND BREACH NOTIFICATION RULES ISSUED  OR  ESTABLISHED
 BY  THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, 45 C.F.R.
 PARTS 160 AND 164, OR THE HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND  ACCOUNTABIL-
 ITY  ACT OF 1996, TO THE EXTENT THE PROVIDER OR COVERED ENTITY MAINTAINS
 PATIENT INFORMATION  IN  THE  SAME  MANNER  AS  MEDICAL  INFORMATION  OR
 PROTECTED  HEALTH  INFORMATION  AS  DESCRIBED  IN  PARAGRAPH (A) OF THIS
 SUBDIVISION;
  (C) INFORMATION COLLECTED AS PART OF A CLINICAL TRIAL SUBJECT  TO  THE
 FEDERAL  POLICY  FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS, ALSO KNOWN AS THE
 "COMMON RULE", PURSUANT TO GOOD CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES  ISSUED  BY
 THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR HARMONIZATION OR PURSUANT TO HUMAN SUBJECT
 PROTECTION  REQUIREMENTS  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES FOOD AND DRUG ADMINIS-
 TRATION;
  (D) THE SALE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION TO OR FROM A  CONSUMER  REPORTING
 AGENCY  IF SUCH INFORMATION IS TO BE REPORTED IN, OR USED TO GENERATE, A
 CONSUMER REPORT AS DEFINED IN SECTION THREE  HUNDRED  EIGHTY-A  OF  THIS
 CHAPTER AND USE OF THAT INFORMATION IS LIMITED BY THE FEDERAL FAIR CRED-
 IT REPORTING ACT, 15 USC 1681;
  (E)  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  COLLECTED,  PROCESSED,  SOLD, OR DISCLOSED
 PURSUANT TO THE FEDERAL GRAMM-LEACH-BLILEY ACT OR ANY FINANCIAL  PRIVACY
 LAWS  OR  REGULATIONS  OF  THE STATE OF NEW YORK, AND IMPLEMENTING REGU-
 LATIONS, IF IT IS IN CONFLICT WITH SUCH LAW; OR
  (F) PERSONAL INFORMATION  COLLECTED,  PROCESSED,  SOLD,  OR  DISCLOSED
 PURSUANT  TO  THE  DRIVER'S  PRIVACY PROTECTION ACT OF 1994, IF IT IS IN
 CONFLICT WITH SUCH ACT.
  4. NOTWITHSTANDING A BUSINESS' OBLIGATIONS TO  RESPOND  TO  AND  HONOR
 CONSUMER RIGHTS REQUESTS PURSUANT TO SECTIONS SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-C,
 SIX  HUNDRED  SEVENTY-SIX-D, AND SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-E OF THIS ARTI-
 CLE:
  (A) THE TIME PERIOD FOR A BUSINESS TO RESPOND TO ANY VERIFIED CONSUMER
 REQUEST MAY BE EXTENDED BY UP TO NINETY ADDITIONAL DAYS WHERE NECESSARY,
 TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE COMPLEXITY AND NUMBER OF THE REQUESTS.  A  BUSI-
 NESS  SHALL  INFORM THE CONSUMER OF ANY SUCH EXTENSION WITHIN FORTY-FIVE
 DAYS OF RECEIPT OF THE REQUEST, TOGETHER WITH THE REASONS FOR THE DELAY;
  (B) IF A BUSINESS DOES NOT TAKE ACTION ON THE REQUEST OF THE CONSUMER,
 SUCH BUSINESS SHALL INFORM THE CONSUMER, WITHOUT DELAY AND AT THE LATEST
 WITHIN THE TIME PERIOD PERMITTED OF RESPONSE BY  THIS  SECTION,  OF  THE
 REASONS  FOR  NOT  TAKING ACTION AND ANY RIGHTS THE CONSUMER MAY HAVE TO
 APPEAL THE DECISION TO THE BUSINESS; AND
  (C) IF REQUESTS FROM A CONSUMER ARE MANIFESTLY UNFOUNDED OR EXCESSIVE,
 IN PARTICULAR BECAUSE OF THEIR  REPETITIVE  CHARACTER,  A  BUSINESS  MAY
 EITHER  CHARGE  A REASONABLE FEE, TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE ADMINISTRATIVE
 COSTS OF PROVIDING THE INFORMATION OR COMMUNICATION OR TAKING THE ACTION
 REQUESTED, OR REFUSE TO ACT ON THE REQUEST AND NOTIFY  THE  CONSUMER  OF
 THE REASON FOR REFUSING THE REQUEST. SUCH BUSINESS SHALL BEAR THE BURDEN
 OF  DEMONSTRATING  THAT  ANY  VERIFIED  CONSUMER  REQUEST  IS MANIFESTLY
 UNFOUNDED OR EXCESSIVE.
 S. 5555  13

  5. A BUSINESS THAT DISCLOSES PERSONAL INFORMATION TO A SERVICE PROVID-
 ER SHALL NOT BE LIABLE  UNDER  THIS  ARTICLE  IF  THE  SERVICE  PROVIDER
 RECEIVING  THE  PERSONAL  INFORMATION  USES  IT  IN  VIOLATION  OF  THE
 RESTRICTIONS SET FORTH IN THIS ARTICLE, PROVIDED THAT, AT  THE  TIME  OF
 DISCLOSING  THE PERSONAL INFORMATION, SUCH BUSINESS DOES NOT HAVE ACTUAL
 KNOWLEDGE, OR REASON TO BELIEVE, THAT THE SERVICE  PROVIDER  INTENDS  TO
 COMMIT  SUCH  A  VIOLATION. A SERVICE PROVIDER SHALL NOT BE LIABLE UNDER
 THIS ARTICLE FOR THE OBLIGATIONS OF A BUSINESS  FOR  WHICH  IT  PROVIDES
 SERVICES AS SET FORTH IN THIS ARTICLE.
  6.  THIS  ARTICLE SHALL NOT BE CONSTRUED TO: (A) REQUIRE A BUSINESS TO
 COLLECT OR RETAIN PERSONAL INFORMATION ABOUT A CONSUMER LONGER  THAN  IT
 WOULD  BE  RETAINED SUCH INFORMATION IN THE ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS;
 OR
  (B) REQUIRE A BUSINESS TO RE-IDENTIFY OR  OTHERWISE  LINK  INFORMATION
 THAT  IS  NOT  MAINTAINED  IN A MANNER THAT WOULD BE CONSIDERED PERSONAL
 INFORMATION.
  7. THE RIGHTS AFFORDED TO CONSUMERS AND THE OBLIGATIONS IMPOSED  ON  A
 BUSINESS  PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE SHALL NOT ADVERSELY AFFECT THE RIGHTS
 AND FREEDOMS OF OTHER CONSUMERS.
  8. THE RIGHTS AFFORDED TO CONSUMERS AND THE OBLIGATIONS IMPOSED ON ANY
 BUSINESS PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE SHALL NOT APPLY  TO  THE  EXTENT  THAT
 THEY  INFRINGE  ON  THE NONCOMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES OF A PUBLISHER, EDITOR,
 REPORTER, OR OTHER PERSON CONNECTED WITH OR EMPLOYED UPON  A  NEWSPAPER,
 MAGAZINE,  OR OTHER PERIODICAL PUBLICATION, OR BY A PRESS ASSOCIATION OR
 WIRE SERVICE.
  § 676-K. CONSUMER'S PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION. 1.  A  CONSUMER  WHO  HAS
 SUFFERED  A  VIOLATION  OF  THIS ARTICLE MAY BRING A LAWSUIT AGAINST THE
 BUSINESS THAT COMMITTED SUCH VIOLATION.  A  VIOLATION  OF  THIS  ARTICLE
 SHALL  BE DEEMED TO CONSTITUTE AN INJURY IN FACT TO THE CONSUMER WHO HAS
 SUFFERED SUCH VIOLATION, AND THE CONSUMER NEED NOT  SUFFER  MONETARY  OR
 PROPERTY  LOSS AS A RESULT OF SUCH VIOLATION IN ORDER TO BRING AN ACTION
 FOR A VIOLATION OF THIS ARTICLE.
  2. A CONSUMER WHO PREVAILS IN SUCH AN ACTION SHALL OBTAIN THE  FOLLOW-
 ING REMEDIES:
  (A) DAMAGES IN AN AMOUNT NOT TO EXCEED SEVEN HUNDRED FIFTY DOLLARS PER
 CONSUMER PER VIOLATION OR ACTUAL DAMAGES, WHICHEVER IS GREATER;
  (B) INJUNCTIVE OR DECLARATORY RELIEF, AS THE COURT DEEMS PROPER;
  (C) REASONABLE ATTORNEY FEES AND COSTS; AND
  (D) ANY OTHER RELIEF THE COURT DEEMS PROPER.
  3.  IN  ASSESSING  THE  AMOUNT  OF  STATUTORY DAMAGES, THE COURT SHALL
 CONSIDER ANY ONE OR MORE OF THE RELEVANT CIRCUMSTANCES PRESENTED BY  ANY
 OF  THE  PARTIES  TO THE CASE, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE NATURE
 AND SERIOUSNESS  OF  THE  MISCONDUCT,  THE  NUMBER  OF  VIOLATIONS,  THE
 PERSISTENCE OF THE MISCONDUCT, THE LENGTH OF TIME OVER WHICH THE MISCON-
 DUCT  OCCURRED,  THE  WILLFULNESS OF THE DEFENDANT'S MISCONDUCT, AND THE
 DEFENDANT'S ASSETS, LIABILITIES, AND NET WORTH.
  4. A CONSUMER BRINGING AN ACTION PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION SHALL NOTIFY
 THE ATTORNEY GENERAL WITHIN THIRTY DAYS OF THE FILING OF SUCH ACTION.
  § 676-L. AGENCY ENFORCEMENT ACTION. 1. THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL,  COUNTY
 DISTRICT  ATTORNEY,  OR CITY CORPORATION COUNSEL HAVING PROPER JURISDIC-
 TION MAY BRING A CIVIL ACTION IN THE NAME OF THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE  OF
 NEW  YORK AGAINST ANY PERSON, BUSINESS, OR SERVICE PROVIDER WHO VIOLATES
 ANY PROVISION OF THIS ARTICLE.
  2.  ANY  PERSON,  BUSINESS,  OR  SERVICE  PROVIDER  WHO  VIOLATES  THE
 PROVISIONS  OF  THIS  ARTICLE MAY BE LIABLE FOR A CIVIL PENALTY OF UP TO
 SEVEN THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR EACH INTENTIONAL  VIOLATION  AND
 S. 5555  14
 
 OF  UP  TO  TWO  THOUSAND  FIVE  HUNDRED  DOLLARS FOR EACH UNINTENTIONAL
 VIOLATION.
  § 676-M. CONSTRUCTION. THIS ARTICLE IS INTENDED TO FURTHER THE CONSTI-
 TUTIONAL  RIGHT  OF  PRIVACY AND TO SUPPLEMENT EXISTING LAWS RELATING TO
 CONSUMERS' PERSONAL INFORMATION. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE ARE  NOT
 LIMITED  TO  INFORMATION  COLLECTED ELECTRONICALLY OR OVER THE INTERNET,
 BUT SHALL APPLY TO THE COLLECTION AND SALE OF ALL  PERSONAL  INFORMATION
 COLLECTED  BY A BUSINESS FROM CONSUMERS. WHEREVER POSSIBLE, LAW RELATING
 TO CONSUMERS' PERSONAL INFORMATION SHOULD BE CONSTRUED TO HARMONIZE WITH
 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE, BUT IN THE EVENT OF A  CONFLICT  BETWEEN
 OTHER LAWS AND THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE, THE PROVISIONS OF THE LAW
 THAT AFFORD THE GREATEST PROTECTION FOR THE RIGHT OF PRIVACY FOR CONSUM-
 ERS SHALL CONTROL.
  §  676-N.  ATTORNEY  GENERAL  REGULATIONS.  1.  WITHIN ONE YEAR OF THE
 EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS ARTICLE, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL  ADOPT  REGU-
 LATIONS  TO  FURTHER  THE  PURPOSES  OF THIS ARTICLE, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
 LIMITED TO:
  (A) DETAILING AS NEEDED THE TYPES OF  INFORMATION  THAT  ARE  PERSONAL
 INFORMATION  IN  TECHNOLOGY,  DATA  COLLECTION  PRACTICES,  OBSTACLES TO
 IMPLEMENTATION, AND PRIVACY CONCERNS;
  (B) ESTABLISHING ANY EXCEPTIONS NECESSARY  TO  COMPLY  WITH  STATE  OR
 FEDERAL  LAW,  INCLUDING,  BUT  NOT  LIMITED TO, THOSE RELATING TO TRADE
 SECRETS AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS;
  (C) FACILITATING AND GOVERNING  THE  SUBMISSION  OF  A  REQUEST  BY  A
 CONSUMER  TO  OPT  OUT  OF  THE SALE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION PURSUANT TO
 SECTION SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-F OF THIS ARTICLE;
  (D) GOVERNING BUSINESS COMPLIANCE WITH A CONSUMER'S OPT-OUT REQUEST;
  (E) DEVELOPING A RECOGNIZABLE AND UNIFORM OPT-OUT LOGO  OR  BUTTON  BY
 ALL  BUSINESSES TO PROMOTE CONSUMER AWARENESS OF THE OPPORTUNITY TO OPT-
 OUT OF THE SALE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION;
  (F) ADJUSTING THE MONETARY THRESHOLD IN CLAUSE ONE OF SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
 OF PARAGRAPH (C) OF SUBDIVISION ONE OF SECTION SIX  HUNDRED  SEVENTY-SIX
 OF  THIS  ARTICLE  IN  JANUARY OF EVERY ODD-NUMBERED YEAR TO REFLECT ANY
 INCREASE IN THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX;
  (G) ESTABLISHING RULES, PROCEDURES, AND ANY  EXCEPTIONS  NECESSARY  TO
 ENSURE  THAT THE NOTICES AND INFORMATION THAT BUSINESSES ARE REQUIRED TO
 PROVIDE PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE ARE PROVIDED IN A MANNER  THAT  MAY  BE
 EASILY  UNDERSTOOD  BY THE AVERAGE CONSUMER, ARE ACCESSIBLE TO CONSUMERS
 WITH DISABILITIES, AND ARE AVAILABLE IN THE LANGUAGE PRIMARILY  USED  TO
 INTERACT  WITH THE CONSUMER, INCLUDING ESTABLISHING RULES AND GUIDELINES
 REGARDING FINANCIAL INCENTIVE OFFERINGS; AND
  (H) ESTABLISHING RULES AND  PROCEDURES  TO  FURTHER  THE  PURPOSES  OF
 SECTIONS SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-D AND SIX HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX-E OF THIS
 ARTICLE  AND  TO  FACILITATE  A  CONSUMER'S OR THE CONSUMER'S AUTHORIZED
 AGENT'S ABILITY TO OBTAIN INFORMATION PURSUANT TO  SECTION  SIX  HUNDRED
 SEVENTY-SIX-I  OF THIS ARTICLE, WITH THE GOAL OF MINIMIZING THE ADMINIS-
 TRATIVE BURDEN ON CONSUMERS, TAKING INTO ACCOUNT  AVAILABLE  TECHNOLOGY,
 SECURITY CONCERNS, AND THE BURDEN ON THE BUSINESS, TO GOVERN A BUSINESS'
 DETERMINATION THAT A REQUEST FOR INFORMATION RECEIVED BY A CONSUMER IS A
 VERIFIABLE  CONSUMER  REQUEST,  INCLUDING  TREATING  A REQUEST SUBMITTED
 THROUGH A PASSWORD-PROTECTED ACCOUNT MAINTAINED BY THE CONSUMER WITH THE
 BUSINESS WHILE THE CONSUMER IS LOGGED INTO THE ACCOUNT AS  A  VERIFIABLE
 CONSUMER  REQUEST  AND PROVIDING A MECHANISM FOR A CONSUMER WHO DOES NOT
 MAINTAIN AN ACCOUNT WITH THE BUSINESS TO REQUEST INFORMATION THROUGH THE
 BUSINESS' AUTHENTICATION OF THE CONSUMER'S IDENTITY.
 S. 5555  15
 
  2. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY  UPDATE  THE  FOREGOING  REGULATIONS,  AND
 ADOPT  ADDITIONAL  REGULATIONS,  AS NECESSARY TO FURTHER THE PURPOSES OF
 THIS ARTICLE.
  3. BEFORE ADOPTING ANY REGULATIONS, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL SOLICIT
 BROAD PUBLIC PARTICIPATION CONCERNING THOSE REGULATIONS.
  §  676-O.  INTERMEDIATE  TRANSACTIONS.  IF A SERIES OF STEPS OR TRANS-
 ACTIONS WERE COMPONENT PARTS OF A SINGLE TRANSACTION INTENDED  FROM  THE
 BEGINNING  TO  BE TAKEN WITH THE INTENTION OF AVOIDING THE REACH OF THIS
 ARTICLE, A COURT SHALL DISREGARD THE INTERMEDIATE STEPS OR  TRANSACTIONS
 FOR PURPOSES OF EFFECTUATING THE PURPOSES OF THIS ARTICLE.
  §  676-P.  NON-WAIVER. ANY PROVISION OF A CONTRACT OR AGREEMENT OF ANY
 KIND THAT PURPORTS TO WAIVE OR LIMIT IN  ANY  WAY  A  CONSUMER'S  RIGHTS
 UNDER THIS ARTICLE, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY RIGHT TO A REMEDY
 OR  MEANS  OF ENFORCEMENT, SHALL BE DEEMED CONTRARY TO PUBLIC POLICY AND
 SHALL BE VOID AND  UNENFORCEABLE.  THIS  SECTION  SHALL  NOT  PREVENT  A
 CONSUMER  FROM DECLINING TO REQUEST INFORMATION FROM A BUSINESS, DECLIN-
 ING TO OPT OUT OF A BUSINESS' SALE OF THE CONSUMER'S  PERSONAL  INFORMA-
 TION, OR AUTHORIZING A BUSINESS TO SELL THE CONSUMER'S PERSONAL INFORMA-
 TION AFTER PREVIOUSLY OPTING OUT.
  §  676-Q. SEVERABILITY. IF ANY PROVISION OF THIS ARTICLE OR THE APPLI-
 CATION THEREOF TO ANY PERSON, BUSINESS,  SERVICE  PROVIDER,  OR  CIRCUM-
 STANCES  IS  HELD  INVALID,  SUCH  INVALIDITY  SHALL  NOT  AFFECT  OTHER
 PROVISIONS OR APPLICATIONS OF THIS ARTICLE WHICH  CAN  BE  GIVEN  EFFECT
 WITHOUT  THE  INVALID  PROVISION  OR  APPLICATION,  AND  TO THIS END THE
 PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE ARE DECLARED TO BE SEVERABLE.
  § 5. This act shall take effect one year after it shall have become  a
 law.