# Prohibits off-track betting corporation vehicles from being used as take-home vehicles

**Bill ID:** S5550
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Timothy M. Kennedy
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [S5550 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5550)

## Summary

Prohibits off-track betting corporation vehicles from being used as take-home vehicles by board members, officers, employees, contractors, subcontractors, consultants, or agents of such corporation or by certain family members of such individuals; provides an exception therefor.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5550
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 8, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sens. KENNEDY, SKOUFIS -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee  on  Racing,  Gaming
  and Wagering
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the racing, pari-mutuel wagering and breeding law, in
  relation to prohibiting off-track betting  corporation  vehicles  from
  being used as take-home vehicles

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The  racing,  pari-mutuel  wagering  and  breeding  law  is
 amended by adding a new section 503-c to read as follows:
  ยง  503-C.  PROHIBITION ON TAKE-HOME VEHICLES. 1. NO REGIONAL OFF-TRACK
 BETTING CORPORATION SHALL ISSUE TO ANY BOARD MEMBER, OFFICER, OR EMPLOY-
 EE OF SUCH CORPORATION, ANY CONTRACTOR,  SUBCONTRACTOR,  CONSULTANT,  OR
 OTHER AGENT OF SUCH CORPORATION, OR ANY SPOUSE, CHILD, SIBLING OR PARENT
 RESIDING  IN  THE  PRINCIPAL  PLACE  OF  ABODE  OF ANY OF SUCH FOREGOING
 PERSONS A MOTOR VEHICLE. ALL MOTOR VEHICLES LEASED, OWNED  OR  OTHERWISE
 CONTROLLED BY SUCH CORPORATION SHALL BE RETURNED TO CORPORATION PROPERTY
 WHEN NOT BEING USED FOR OFFICIAL BUSINESS OF SUCH CORPORATION.
  2.  NOTWITHSTANDING  SUBDIVISION  ONE OF THIS SECTION, A REGIONAL OFF-
 TRACK BETTING CORPORATION SHALL BE ALLOWED TO ISSUE  TAKE-HOME  VEHICLES
 TO EMPLOYEES AND OFFICERS PROVIDED SUCH CORPORATION HAS A WRITTEN POLICY
 ON  TAKE-HOME  VEHICLES  THAT  IS COMPLIANT WITH THE OFFICE OF THE STATE
 COMPTROLLER RULES AND REGULATIONS, THAT SUCH  WRITTEN  POLICY  HAS  BEEN
 APPROVED  BY  THE GAMING COMMISSION, AND SUCH POLICY AND RECORDS RELATED
 TO SUCH WRITTEN POLICY ARE SUBJECT TO RANDOM  AUDITS  CONDUCTED  BY  THE
 GAMING COMMISSION.
  ยง  2.  This  act  shall take effect on the sixtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02066-01-3