# Provides a one hundred dollar per day credit to customers of electric and gas corporations for power outages of twenty-four hours or more

**Bill ID:** S5565
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Leroy Comrie
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5565 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5565)

## Summary

Provides a one hundred dollar per day credit to customers of electric and gas corporations for power outages of twenty-four hours or more.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5565
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 8, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sens. COMRIE, MAYER -- read twice and ordered printed, and
  when printed to be committed to the Committee on Energy and Telecommu-
  nications
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the public service law, in relation to providing a one
  hundred dollar per day credit to customers of electric and gas  corpo-
  rations for power outages of twenty-four hours or more

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The public service law is amended by adding a  new  section
 73-b to read as follows:
  ยง 73-B. POWER OUTAGE CREDIT. EVERY ELECTRIC CORPORATION AND GAS CORPO-
 RATION  IN  THIS STATE SHALL PROVIDE ITS CUSTOMERS WITH A CREDIT TO SUCH
 CUSTOMERS' ACCOUNTS AT ANY TIME A CUSTOMER IS WITHOUT POWER FOR A PERIOD
 OF TIME IN EXCESS OF TWENTY-FOUR HOURS. SUCH  CREDIT  SHALL  BE  IN  THE
 AMOUNT  OF  ONE  HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR EACH TWENTY-FOUR HOUR PERIOD THAT A
 CUSTOMER IS WITHOUT POWER AND SHALL ONLY BE CREDITED TO THE  ACCOUNT  OF
 EACH  CUSTOMER  OF  SUCH CORPORATION WHO HAS BEEN WITHOUT POWER FOR SUCH
 PERIOD OF TIME. CREDIT TO A CUSTOMER'S ACCOUNT  MADE  PURSUANT  TO  THIS
 SECTION  SHALL  BE  USED TO PAY CHARGES AGAINST SUCH ACCOUNT ASSESSED BY
 THE ELECTRIC CORPORATION OR GAS CORPORATION AND SUCH CUSTOMER SHALL  NOT
 BE REQUIRED TO PAY ON SUCH ACCOUNT UNTIL SUCH CREDIT HAS BEEN COMPLETELY
 EXHAUSTED.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the thirtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03841-01-3