# Provides for reimbursement of unused one-way, round trip, or multi-trip tickets purchased for use on the Long Island Rail Road or the Metro-North Commuter Railroad Company

**Bill ID:** S5585
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Leroy Comrie
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5585 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5585)

## Summary

Provides for the reimbursement of the ticket price of unused one-way, round trip or multi-trip tickets purchased for use on the Long Island Rail Road or the Metro-North Commuter Railroad Company if returned within one year.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5585
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 8, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COMRIE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the public authorities  law,  in  relation  to  one-way,
  round  trip or multi-trip tickets and tickets purchased after boarding
  the Long Island Rail Road and the Metro-North Commuter Railroad Compa-
  ny

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  public  authorities law is amended by adding two new
 sections 1266-m and 1266-n to read as follows:
  ยง 1266-M. LONG ISLAND RAIL  ROAD  AND  METRO-NORTH  COMMUTER  RAILROAD
 COMPANY; REIMBURSEMENT.  NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, ANY
 ONE-WAY,  ROUND  TRIP  OR MULTI-TRIP TICKET NOT PURCHASED FOR A SPECIFIC
 MONTH OR UNLIMITED TRAVEL, BUT PURCHASED FOR USE ON THE LONG ISLAND RAIL
 ROAD OR THE METRO-NORTH COMMUTER RAILROAD COMPANY SHALL BE VALID FOR ONE
 YEAR FROM THE DATE OF PURCHASE AND THE  AUTHORITY  SHALL  REIMBURSE  ONE
 HUNDRED  PERCENT  OF  THE  PURCHASE PRICE OF ANY UNUSED LONG ISLAND RAIL
 ROAD OR METRO-NORTH COMMUTER RAILROAD COMPANY  ONE-WAY,  ROUND  TRIP  OR
 MULTI-TRIP TICKET TO THE BEARER OF SUCH TICKET, PROVIDED THAT SUCH TICK-
 ET IS RETURNED WITHIN ONE YEAR OF THE DATE OF PURCHASE. THE AUTHORITY IS
 PROHIBITED FROM ASSESSING ANY SURCHARGE OR PROCESSING FEE FOR THE RETURN
 OF  ANY  SUCH  UNUSED ONE-WAY, ROUND TRIP OR MULTI-TRIP TICKET PURCHASED
 FOR USE ON THE LONG ISLAND RAIL ROAD OR THE METRO-NORTH  COMMUTER  RAIL-
 ROAD COMPANY.
  ยง  1266-N.  LONG  ISLAND  RAIL  ROAD AND METRO-NORTH COMMUTER RAILROAD
 COMPANY; FARE AFTER BOARDING.  ADDITIONAL  TRAIN  FARE  PURCHASED  AFTER
 BOARDING  BY  A  PASSENGER  POSSESSING  A TICKET WITH INSUFFICIENT FARE,
 SHALL BE ROUNDED UP TO THE NEAREST QUARTER OF A DOLLAR.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00366-01-3