# Relates to procurement requirements for end point device security

**Bill ID:** S5615
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin Thomas
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S5615 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5615)

## Summary

Directs that state agencies require that procurement of personal computing goods, services and solutions meet the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Framework.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5615
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 8, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  THOMAS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Procurement and Contracts
 
 AN ACT to amend the  state  finance  law,  in  relation  to  procurement
  requirements for end point device security
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 165 of the state finance law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 9 to read as follows:
  9. END POINT DEVICE SECURITY. (A) FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SUBDIVISION
 "END POINT DEVICE" SHALL MEAN  PERSONAL  COMPUTING  GOODS  THAT  INCLUDE
 DESKTOPS,  LAPTOPS, ALL-IN-ONES, TABLETS, MOBILE OR CELLULAR TELEPHONES,
 THIN CLIENTS, AND MONITORS OF VARIOUS SIZES; PRINTERS;  AND  MULTI-FUNC-
 TIONAL DEVICES THAT INCLUDE IMAGING DEVICES THAT COMBINE OPERATIONS SUCH
 AS COPYING, PRINTING, SCANNING AND FAXING INTO ONE MACHINE.
  (B)  THE COMMISSIONER AND ALL STATE AGENCIES, WHEN PROCURING END POINT
 DEVICES, SHALL REQUIRE THOSE DEVICES, SERVICES AND SOLUTIONS TO MEET THE
 NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF  STANDARDS  AND  TECHNOLOGY  (NIST)  CYBERSECURITY
 FRAMEWORK.
  (C)  WITHIN  ONE  YEAR  OF  ADOPTION OF ANY AMENDMENTS TO THE SECURITY
 STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES REFERENCED IN PARAGRAPH (B) OF THIS SUBDIVISION
 THE COMMISSIONER AND EACH STATE AGENCY  SHALL  UPDATE  THEIR  END  POINT
 DEVICE PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07739-01-3