# Provides that a dealer-controlled electronic table game shall not be considered a slot machine

**Bill ID:** S5626
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Joseph P. Addabbo Jr.
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5626 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5626)

## Summary

Provides that a dealer-controlled electronic table game shall not be considered a slot machine.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5626
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 9, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ADDABBO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Racing, Gaming and  Wager-
  ing
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the racing, pari-mutuel wagering and breeding law, in
  relation to providing that a dealer-controlled electronic  table  game
  shall not be considered a slot machine

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 1301 of the racing, pari-mutuel wagering and breed-
 ing law is amended by adding a new subdivision 14-a to read as follows:
  14-A. "DEALER-CONTROLLED ELECTRONIC TABLE GAME". A TABLE GAME OPERATED
 BY A LIVE DEALER IN WHICH THE OUTCOME IS DETERMINED BY  THE  ACTIONS  OF
 THE  DEALER,  THAT  USES  ELECTRONICS AS PART OF THE GAME'S OPERATION IN
 CONNECTION WITH THE COLLECTION AND PAYOFF OF WAGERS, BUT NOT  TO  DETER-
 MINE THE GAME OUTCOME.
  ยง  2. Subdivision 38 of section 1301 of the racing, pari-mutuel wager-
 ing and breeding law, as added by chapter 174 of the laws  of  2013,  is
 amended to read as follows:
  38.  "Slot machine". A mechanical, electrical or other device, contri-
 vance or machine which, upon insertion  of  a  coin,  token  or  similar
 object  therein,  or  upon  payment  of any consideration whatsoever, is
 available to play or operate, the play or operation of which, whether by
 reason of the skill of the operator or application  of  the  element  of
 chance,  or both, may deliver or entitle the individual playing or oper-
 ating the machine to receive cash, or tokens to be exchanged  for  cash,
 or  to  receive  merchandise  or  any  other thing of value, whether the
 payoff is made automatically from the machine or in  any  other  manner,
 except  that the cash equivalent value of any merchandise or other thing
 of value shall not be included in determining the payout percentage of a
 slot machine; PROVIDED, HOWEVER,  THAT  A  DEALER-CONTROLLED  ELECTRONIC
 TABLE GAME SHALL NOT BE CONSIDERED A SLOT MACHINE.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09035-01-3