# Establishes criteria for the sale of automated employment decision tools

**Bill ID:** S5641AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Leroy Comrie
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5641AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5641AA)

## Summary

Establishes criteria for the use of automated employment decision tools; provides for enforcement for violations of such criteria.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5641--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 10, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COMRIE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Labor  --  recommitted  to
  the  Committee  on  Labor  in accordance with Senate Rule 6, sec. 8 --
  committee discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as  amended  and
  recommitted to said committee

 AN ACT to amend the labor law, in relation to automated employment deci-
  sion tools
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The labor law is amended by adding a new  article  20-D  to
 read as follows:
  ARTICLE 20-D
  AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOLS
 SECTION 750. DEFINITIONS.
  751. ANTI-DISCRIMINATION.
  752. REQUIREMENTS  FOR  A  DEPLOYER  OF  AN AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT
  DECISION TOOL.
  753. REQUIREMENTS FOR A DEVELOPER  OF  AN  AUTOMATED  EMPLOYMENT
  DECISION TOOL.
  754. AI GOVERNANCE.
  755. TRANSPARENCY.
  756. ENFORCEMENT.
  757. COMPLIANCE.
  §  750.  DEFINITIONS.  FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS ARTICLE, THE FOLLOWING
 TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  1. "ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE" SHALL MEAN A  MACHINE-BASED  SYSTEM  THAT
 CAN,  FOR  A  GIVEN  SET  OF HUMAN-DEFINED OBJECTIVES, MAKE PREDICTIONS,
 RECOMMENDATIONS, OR DECISIONS INFLUENCING REAL OR VIRTUAL  ENVIRONMENTS.
 AN  ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  SYSTEM USES MACHINE AND HUMAN-BASED INPUTS
 TO:
  (A) PERCEIVE REAL AND VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS;
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02768-02-3
 S. 5641--A  2
 
  (B) ABSTRACT SUCH PERCEPTIONS INTO MODELS THROUGH ANALYSIS IN AN AUTO-
 MATED MANNER; AND
  (C)  USE  MODEL  INFERENCE  TO  FORMULATE  OPTIONS  FOR INFORMATION OR
 ACTION.
  2. "AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL" SHALL MEAN A SYSTEM OR SERVICE
 THAT USES ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND HAS  BEEN  SPECIFICALLY  DEVELOPED
 AND  MARKETED TO, OR SPECIFICALLY MODIFIED TO BE, THE CONTROLLING FACTOR
 IN MAKING A CONSEQUENTIAL EMPLOYMENT DECISION.
  3. "CONSEQUENTIAL EMPLOYMENT DECISION" SHALL MEAN A DETERMINATION MADE
 BY A DEPLOYER TO HIRE, PROMOTE, OR TERMINATE THE EMPLOYMENT OF AN  INDI-
 VIDUAL.
  4. "CONTROLLING FACTOR" SHALL MEAN A FACTOR THAT IS WEIGHTED MORE THAN
 ALL OTHER FACTORS COMBINED.
  5.  "DEPLOYER" SHALL MEAN ANY PERSON, PARTNERSHIP, OR CORPORATION THAT
 USES AN AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL FOR A  CONSEQUENTIAL  EMPLOY-
 MENT DECISION.
  6. "DEVELOPER" SHALL MEAN ANY PERSON, PARTNERSHIP, OR CORPORATION THAT
 KNOWINGLY  DESIGNS,  CODES, OR PRODUCES AN AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION
 TOOL, OR SUBSTANTIALLY MODIFIES AN  ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  SYSTEM  OR
 SERVICE  FOR  THE  INTENDED PURPOSE OF BEING THE CONTROLLING FACTOR IN A
 CONSEQUENTIAL EMPLOYMENT DECISION, WHETHER FOR ITS OWN USE OR FOR USE BY
 A THIRD PARTY.
  7. "IMPACT ASSESSMENT" SHALL MEAN A DOCUMENTED  RISK-BASED  EVALUATION
 OF AN AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MINIMUM
 REQUIREMENTS  IN  SUBDIVISION  TWO OF SECTION SEVEN HUNDRED FIFTY-TWO OF
 THIS ARTICLE AND SUBDIVISION THREE OF SECTION SEVEN HUNDRED  FIFTY-THREE
 OF THIS ARTICLE, RESPECTIVELY.
  §  751.  ANTI-DISCRIMINATION. 1. A DEPLOYER SHALL NOT USE AN AUTOMATED
 EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL IN A MANNER THAT VIOLATES  ARTICLE  FIFTEEN  OF
 THE EXECUTIVE LAW.
  2. NOTHING IN THIS SECTION SHALL LIMIT A DEPLOYER FROM PROCESSING DATA
 FOR  THE  PURPOSE OF PREVENTING OR ADDRESSING UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION OR
 COMPLYING WITH THIS ARTICLE OR OTHERWISE EVALUATING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF
 AN AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL.
  § 752. REQUIREMENTS FOR A DEPLOYER OF AN AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION
 TOOL. 1.  WITHIN ONE YEAR OF THE EFFECTIVE DATE  OF  THIS  SECTION,  AND
 ANNUALLY  THEREAFTER,  A DEPLOYER SHALL PERFORM AN IMPACT ASSESSMENT FOR
 ANY AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL THAT SUCH DEPLOYER USES.
  2. THE IMPACT ASSESSMENT REQUIRED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION ONE OF  THIS
 SECTION SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (A)  A  STATEMENT  OF THE PURPOSE OF THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION
 TOOL AND ITS BENEFITS, USES, AND DEPLOYMENT CONTEXTS;
  (B) A DESCRIPTION OF THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION  TOOL'S  OUTPUT
 AND HOW SUCH OUTPUT IS THE CONTROLLING FACTOR IN A CONSEQUENTIAL EMPLOY-
 MENT DECISION;
  (C)  A  SUMMARY  OF  THE TYPE OF DATA COLLECTED FROM AN INDIVIDUAL AND
 PROCESSED BY THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL WHEN  SUCH  TOOL  IS
 THE CONTROLLING FACTOR IN A CONSEQUENTIAL EMPLOYMENT DECISION;
  (D) A STATEMENT OF THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE DEPLOYER'S USE OF THE AUTO-
 MATED  EMPLOYMENT  DECISION  TOOL  IS CONSISTENT WITH OR VARIES FROM THE
 DEVELOPER'S STATEMENT OF INTENDED USE PROVIDED TO SUCH DEPLOYER PURSUANT
 TO SUBDIVISION ONE OF SECTION SEVEN HUNDRED FIFTY-THREE OF THIS ARTICLE;
  (E) AN ASSESSMENT OF  ANY  REASONABLY  FORESEEABLE  RISK  OF  UNLAWFUL
 DISCRIMINATION  ARISING FROM THE DEPLOYER'S USE OF THE AUTOMATED EMPLOY-
 MENT DECISION TOOL AND A DESCRIPTION OF  THE  SAFEGUARD  IMPLEMENTED  OR
 THAT WILL BE IMPLEMENTED BY SUCH DEPLOYER TO MITIGATE SUCH RISK;
 S. 5641--A  3
 
  (F)  A  DESCRIPTION  OF  HOW THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL IS
 USED AND MONITORED BY THE DEPLOYER WHEN IT IS THE CONTROLLING FACTOR  IN
 A CONSEQUENTIAL EMPLOYMENT DECISION; AND
  (G)  A  DESCRIPTION  OF HOW THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL HAS
 BEEN OR WILL BE EVALUATED FOR VALIDITY OR RELEVANCE.
  § 753. REQUIREMENTS FOR A DEVELOPER OF AN AUTOMATED  EMPLOYMENT  DECI-
 SION  TOOL.  1.  A  DEVELOPER  SHALL PROVIDE A DEPLOYER WITH A STATEMENT
 REGARDING THE INTENDED USE OF THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL AND
 DOCUMENTATION REGARDING:
  (A) THE KNOWN LIMITATIONS  OF  THE  CONSEQUENTIAL  AUTOMATED  DECISION
 TOOL,  INCLUDING  ANY  REASONABLY FORESEEABLE RISK OF UNLAWFUL DISCRIMI-
 NATION ARISING FROM ITS INTENDED USE;
  (B) A DESCRIPTION OF THE TYPE OF DATA USED TO  PROGRAM  OR  TRAIN  THE
 AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL; AND
  (C)  A  DESCRIPTION  OF HOW THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL WAS
 EVALUATED FOR VALIDITY AND EXPLAINABILITY BEFORE SALE OR LICENSING.
  2. WITHIN ONE YEAR OF THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION, AND ANNUALLY
 THEREAFTER, A DEVELOPER SHALL PERFORM AN IMPACT ASSESSMENT FOR ANY AUTO-
 MATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL MADE AVAILABLE FOR SALE OR LICENSING.
  3. THE IMPACT ASSESSMENT REQUIRED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION ONE OF  THIS
 SECTION SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (A)  A  STATEMENT  OF THE INTENDED PURPOSE OF THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT
 DECISION TOOL AND ITS INTENDED BENEFITS, USES, AND DEPLOYMENT CONTEXTS;
  (B) A DESCRIPTION OF THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION  TOOL'S  OUTPUT
 AND  HOW  SUCH OUTPUT IS INTENDED TO BE THE CONTROLLING FACTOR IN CONSE-
 QUENTIAL EMPLOYMENT DECISIONS;
  (C) A SUMMARY OF THE TYPE OF DATA THE  AUTOMATED  EMPLOYMENT  DECISION
 TOOL  IS  INTENDED TO COLLECT FROM AN INDIVIDUAL WHEN IT IS THE CONTROL-
 LING FACTOR IN A CONSEQUENTIAL EMPLOYMENT DECISION;
  (D) AN ASSESSMENT OF  ANY  REASONABLY  FORESEEABLE  RISK  OF  UNLAWFUL
 DISCRIMINATION ARISING FROM THE INTENDED USE OF THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT
 DECISION  TOOL  AND  A  DESCRIPTION OF THE SAFEGUARD IMPLEMENTED OR THAT
 WILL BE IMPLEMENTED BY THE DEVELOPER TO MITIGATE SUCH RISK; AND
  (E) A DESCRIPTION OF HOW THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL CAN BE
 MONITORED BY THE DEPLOYER WHEN IT IS THE CONTROLLING FACTOR IN A  CONSE-
 QUENTIAL EMPLOYMENT DECISION.
  4.  THIS  SECTION  DOES  NOT REQUIRE A DEVELOPER TO DISCLOSE ANY TRADE
 SECRET, AS DEFINED BY SECTION 1839 OF TITLE  18  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES
 CODE,  OR  OTHER  PRIVILEGED  OR  CONFIDENTIAL BUSINESS INFORMATION TO A
 DEPLOYER.
  § 754. AI GOVERNANCE. 1. A  DEPLOYER  OR  DEVELOPER  SHALL  ESTABLISH,
 DOCUMENT,  IMPLEMENT,  AND  MAINTAIN  A GOVERNANCE PROGRAM THAT CONTAINS
 REASONABLE ADMINISTRATIVE AND  TECHNICAL  SAFEGUARDS  TO  MAP,  MEASURE,
 MANAGE, AND GOVERN THE REASONABLY FORESEEABLE RISK OF UNLAWFUL DISCRIMI-
 NATION  ASSOCIATED  WITH THE USE OR INTENDED USE OF AN AUTOMATED EMPLOY-
 MENT DECISION TOOL.
  2. THE SAFEGUARDS REQUIRED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION
 SHALL BE APPROPRIATE TO:
  (A) THE USE OR INTENDED USE OF THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL;
  (B) THE ENTITY'S ROLE AS A DEPLOYER, DEVELOPER, OR BOTH;
  (C) THE DEPLOYER OR DEVELOPER'S SIZE, COMPLEXITY, AND RESOURCES;
  (D) THE NATURE, CONTEXT, AND SCOPE OF THE ACTIVITIES OF  THE  DEPLOYER
 OR  DEVELOPER IN CONNECTION WITH THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL;
 AND
  (E) THE TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY AND COST  OF  AVAILABLE  TOOLS,  ASSESS-
 MENTS,  AND  OTHER MEANS USED BY THE DEPLOYER OR DEVELOPER TO MAP, MEAS-
 S. 5641--A  4
 
 URE, MANAGE, AND GOVERN THE RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH AN  AUTOMATED  EMPLOY-
 MENT DECISION TOOL.
  3.  A  GOVERNANCE PROGRAM REQUIRED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS
 SECTION SHALL BE DESIGNED TO, AT A MINIMUM:
  (A) DESIGNATE ONE OR MORE EMPLOYEES TO BE RESPONSIBLE  FOR  OVERSEEING
 AND MAINTAINING THE GOVERNANCE PROGRAM AND COMPLIANCE WITH THIS ARTICLE;
  (I)  AN  EMPLOYEE  DESIGNATED PURSUANT TO THIS PARAGRAPH MAY ASSERT TO
 THEIR EMPLOYER A GOOD FAITH BELIEF THAT THE DESIGN, PRODUCTION,  OR  USE
 OF  AN  AUTOMATED  EMPLOYMENT  DECISION  TOOL  FAILS  TO COMPLY WITH THE
 REQUIREMENTS OF THIS ARTICLE.
  (II) AN EMPLOYER OF AN EMPLOYEE DESIGNATED PURSUANT TO THIS  PARAGRAPH
 SHALL  CONDUCT  A PROMPT AND COMPLETE ASSESSMENT OF ANY COMPLIANCE ISSUE
 RAISED BY SUCH EMPLOYEE.
  (B) IDENTIFY AND IMPLEMENT SAFEGUARDS TO ADDRESS REASONABLY  FORESEEA-
 BLE  RISKS OF UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION RESULTING FROM THE USE OR INTENDED
 USE OF AN AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL;
  (C) WHEN ACTING AS A DEPLOYER, CONDUCT IMPACT ASSESSMENTS  IN  ACCORD-
 ANCE WITH SECTION SEVEN HUNDRED FIFTY-TWO OF THIS ARTICLE;
  (D) WHEN ACTING AS A DEVELOPER, MEET ALL OBLIGATIONS REQUIRED PURSUANT
 TO SECTION SEVEN HUNDRED FIFTY-THREE OF THIS ARTICLE;
  (E)  CONDUCT AN ANNUAL AND COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF THE POLICIES, PRAC-
 TICES, AND PROCEDURES TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS ARTICLE;
  (F) MAINTAIN THE RESULTS OF THE IMPACT  ASSESSMENT  REQUIRED  BY  THIS
 ARTICLE  FOR  TWO  YEARS AFTER THE COMPLETION OF SUCH IMPACT ASSESSMENT;
 AND
  (G) EVALUATE AND MAKE REASONABLE  ADJUSTMENTS  TO  ADMINISTRATIVE  AND
 TECHNICAL  SAFEGUARDS  IN  LIGHT  OF MATERIAL CHANGES IN TECHNOLOGY, THE
 RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL, THE  STATE
 OF  TECHNICAL  STANDARDS,  AND  CHANGES  IN THE BUSINESS ARRANGEMENTS OR
 OPERATIONS OF THE DEPLOYER OR DEVELOPER.
  § 755. TRANSPARENCY. 1. A DEPLOYER SHALL, AT OR BEFORE THE TIME  OF  A
 CONSEQUENTIAL  EMPLOYMENT  DECISION,  NOTIFY  THE INDIVIDUAL THAT IS THE
 SUBJECT OF THE  CONSEQUENTIAL  EMPLOYMENT  DECISION  THAT  AN  AUTOMATED
 EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL IS IN USE.
  2. A DEPLOYER SHALL PROVIDE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION TO AN INDIVIDUAL
 NOTIFIED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION:
  (A)  A  STATEMENT  OF THE PURPOSE OF THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION
 TOOL;
  (B) A PLAIN LANGUAGE DESCRIPTION OF HOW THE AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECI-
 SION TOOL IS THE CONTROLLING  FACTOR  IN  THE  CONSEQUENTIAL  EMPLOYMENT
 DECISION; AND
  (C) CONTACT INFORMATION OF THE DEPLOYER.
  3. A DEPLOYER OR DEVELOPER SHALL MAKE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE, IN A READILY
 ACCESSIBLE  MANNER,  A  PLAIN LANGUAGE POLICY THAT PROVIDES A SUMMARY OF
 THE FOLLOWING:
  (A) THE TYPE OF AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION TOOL CURRENTLY IN USE OR
 MADE AVAILABLE TO OTHERS FOR USE; AND
  (B) HOW THE DEPLOYER OR DEVELOPER MANAGES ANY  REASONABLY  FORESEEABLE
 RISK  OF  UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION THAT ARISES FROM THE AUTOMATED EMPLOY-
 MENT DECISION TOOL CURRENTLY IN USE OR MADE AVAILABLE TO OTHERS FOR USE.
  § 756. ENFORCEMENT. 1. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY INITIATE  AN  INVESTI-
 GATION  OF  A  DEPLOYER  OR DEVELOPER IF A PREPONDERANCE OF THE EVIDENCE
 ESTABLISHES A SUSPICION OF A VIOLATION OF THIS ARTICLE.
  (A) UPON THE REQUEST OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, A DEPLOYER OR  DEVELOPER
 SHALL,  WITHIN  FORTY-FIVE  DAYS,  PROVIDE  TO  THE ATTORNEY GENERAL ANY
 IMPACT ASSESSMENT PERFORMED PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE.
 S. 5641--A  5
 
  (B) THE DISCLOSURE OF AN IMPACT ASSESSMENT PURSUANT TO  PARAGRAPH  (A)
 OF  THIS SUBDIVISION DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A WAIVER OF ANY ATTORNEY-CLIENT
 PRIVILEGE OR WORK-PRODUCT PROTECTION THAT  MIGHT  OTHERWISE  EXIST  WITH
 RESPECT TO SUCH IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND ANY INFORMATION CONTAINED THEREIN.
  (C)  A  TRADE  SECRET,  AS  DEFINED BY SECTION 1839 OF TITLE 18 OF THE
 UNITED STATES CODE, THAT IS CONTAINED IN AN IMPACT ASSESSMENT  DISCLOSED
 TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL PURSUANT TO PARAGRAPH (A) OF THIS SUBDIVISION IS
 EXEMPT FROM ARTICLE SIX OF THE PUBLIC OFFICERS LAW.
  2. (A) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL PROVIDE WRITTEN NOTICE TO A DEPLOYER
 OR DEVELOPER OF AN ALLEGED VIOLATION OF THIS ARTICLE AT LEAST FORTY-FIVE
 DAYS PRIOR TO COMMENCING AN ENFORCEMENT ACTION.
  (B)  THE  DEPLOYER  OR DEVELOPER MAY CURE THE NOTICED VIOLATION WITHIN
 FORTY-FIVE DAYS OF RECEIVING THE WRITTEN NOTICE  REQUIRED  BY  PARAGRAPH
 (A) OF THIS SUBDIVISION.
  §  757.  COMPLIANCE.  A  DEPLOYER OR DEVELOPER THAT COMPLIES WITH THIS
 ARTICLE SHALL BE  DEEMED  COMPLIANT  WITH  ANY  LAW,  REGULATION,  RULE,
 REQUIREMENT, OR STANDARD RELATED TO THE PERFORMANCE OF AN IMPACT ASSESS-
 MENT,  AUDIT,  OR  GOVERNANCE  PROGRAM, OR THE EQUIVALENT THEREOF, OF AN
 AUTOMATED EMPLOYMENT DECISION  TOOL  THAT  IS  ADOPTED,  MAINTAINED,  OR
 ENFORCED BY A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF NEW YORK STATE.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately.