# Provides a tax credit for small businesses employing a person previously convicted of a crime

**Bill ID:** S5673
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Nathalia Fernandez
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5673 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5673)

## Summary

Provides a tax credit for small businesses employing a person previously convicted of a crime; provides a tax credit of one thousand five hundred dollars for each person employed.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5673
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. FERNANDEZ -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Budget and Revenue
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the tax law, in relation to providing a tax credit for
  small businesses employing a person previously convicted of a crime
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  210-B  of the tax law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 59 to read as follows:
  59. REHABILITATION OPPORTUNITY TAX CREDIT. A TAXPAYER SHALL BE ALLOWED
 A CREDIT, AGAINST THE TAX IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE, OF ONE THOUSAND  FIVE
 HUNDRED  DOLLARS  FOR  EACH PERSON PREVIOUSLY CONVICTED OF A CRIME HIRED
 DURING A TAXABLE YEAR AND RETAINED  FOR  FULL-TIME  EMPLOYMENT  BY  SUCH
 BUSINESS  FOR  AT  LEAST SIX MONTHS. SUCH TAX CREDIT SHALL BE APPLICABLE
 ONLY TO BUSINESSES EMPLOYING FIFTY OR FEWER EMPLOYEES.
  ยง 2. Subparagraph (B) of paragraph 1 of subsection (i) of section  606
 of the tax law is amended by adding a new clause (l) to read as follows:

 (L) REHABILITATION OPPORTUNITY  AMOUNT OF CREDIT UNDER SUBDIVISION
 TAX CREDIT UNDER SUBSECTION (OOO)  FIFTY-NINE OF SECTION TWO HUNDRED
  TEN-B
 
  ยง  3. Section 606 of the tax law is amended by adding a new subsection
 (ooo) to read as follows:
  (OOO) REHABILITATION OPPORTUNITY  TAX  CREDIT.  A  TAXPAYER  SHALL  BE
 ALLOWED  A CREDIT, AGAINST THE TAX IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE, OF ONE THOU-
 SAND FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR EACH  PERSON  PREVIOUSLY  CONVICTED  OF  A
 CRIME  HIRED DURING A TAXABLE YEAR AND RETAINED FOR FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT
 BY SUCH BUSINESS FOR AT LEAST SIX  MONTHS.  SUCH  TAX  CREDIT  SHALL  BE
 APPLICABLE ONLY TO BUSINESSES EMPLOYING FIFTY OR FEWER EMPLOYEES.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09672-01-3