# Prohibits ear clipping and tail docking of dogs unless deemed medically necessary to protect the life or health of the dog

**Bill ID:** S5674
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Nathalia Fernandez
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5674 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5674)

## Summary

Prohibits ear clipping and tail docking of dogs unless deemed medically necessary to protect the life or health of the dog.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5674
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. FERNANDEZ -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Agriculture
 
 AN  ACT to amend the agriculture and markets law, in relation to prohib-
  iting ear clipping and tail docking of dogs  unless  deemed  medically
  necessary to protect the life or health of the dog

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 1 of section 365 of the agriculture and markets
 law, as amended by chapter 458 of the laws of 1985, is amended  to  read
 as follows:
  1.  Whoever clips or cuts off or causes or procures another to clip or
 cut off the whole or any part of an ear of any dog unless an  anesthetic
 shall  have  been  given  to  the  dog  and the operation performed by a
 licensed veterinarian WHO DEEMS SUCH OPERATION  MEDICALLY  NECESSARY  TO
 PROTECT  THE  LIFE  OR  HEALTH  OF  THE DOG, is guilty of a misdemeanor,
 punishable by imprisonment for not more than one year, or a fine of  not
 more than one thousand dollars, or by both.
  ยง  2.  The  agriculture  and  markets  law  is amended by adding a new
 section 365-a to read as follows:
  ยง 365-A. DOCKING DOG TAILS; UNLAWFUL. 1. ANY PERSON WHO CUTS THE BONE,
 TISSUE, MUSCLES OR TENDONS OF THE TAIL OF ANY DOG, OR OTHERWISE OPERATES
 UPON IT IN ANY MANNER FOR THE PURPOSE OR WITH THE EFFECT OF  DOCKING  OR
 OTHERWISE  ALTERING  THE  NATURAL  CARRIAGE  OR  LENGTH  OF THE TAIL, OR
 ASSISTS, PROCURES, PROMOTES OR ENCOURAGES SUCH CUTTING OR OPERATION  FOR
 REASONS  OTHER  THAN  TO PROTECT THE LIFE OR HEALTH OF THE DOG AS DEEMED
 NECESSARY BY A DULY LICENSED VETERINARIAN, IS GUILTY  OF  A  MISDEMEANOR
 PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF NOT MORE THAN FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS.
  2. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY TO ANY DOG OR PERSON
 WHO  IS  THE OWNER OR POSSESSOR OF ANY DOG WHOSE TAIL HAS BEEN CERTIFIED
 AS HAVING BEEN DOCKED, CUT OR ALTERED PRIOR TO AUGUST FIRST,  TWO  THOU-
 SAND TWENTY-FOUR.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07760-01-3