# Requires the disclosure of bedbug infestation history for the previous year to prospective lessees

**Bill ID:** S5701
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5701 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5701)

## Summary

Requires the disclosure of bedbug infestation history for the previous year to prospective lessees; does not apply to cities with a population of one million or more; includes co-op sales and co-op and condo rentals in addition to other types of rentals.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5701
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  PARKER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the real property law, in relation to providing prospec-
  tive lessees with the property's bedbug infestation  history  for  the
  previous year

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  The real property law is amended by adding a  new  section
 235-j to read as follows:
  ยง  235-J.  NOTICE  OF  BEDBUG  INFESTATION HISTORY. 1. ALL PROSPECTIVE
 LESSEES SHALL BE FURNISHED WITH A  NOTICE,  IN  A  FORM  PROMULGATED  OR
 APPROVED  BY  THE  STATE DIVISION OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY RENEWAL, THAT
 SETS FORTH THE PROPERTY'S BEDBUG INFESTATION HISTORY  FOR  THE  PREVIOUS
 YEAR.
  2. INFORMATION SHALL INCLUDE ANY BEDBUG INFESTATION OF THE PREMISES TO
 BE  RENTED BY THE PROSPECTIVE TENANT AND THE BUILDING IN WHICH THE PREM-
 ISES ARE LOCATED.
  3. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY  TO  CITIES  WITH  A
 POPULATION OF ONE MILLION OR MORE.
  4. THIS SECTION SHALL APPLY TO, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, CO-OP SALES AND
 CO-OP AND CONDO RENTALS.
  ยง  2.  This  act  shall take effect on the sixtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.  Effective immediately, the commissioner of the state
 division of housing and community renewal may take any action  necessary
 for the timely implementation of this act on or before the date on which
 it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07399-01-3