# Relates to increasing the class for certain vehicular crimes and enacting Kane's law

**Bill ID:** S5727
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Timothy M. Kennedy
**Status:** Stricken
**PDF:** [S5727 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5727)

## Summary

Relates to increasing the class for certain vehicular crimes and enacting Kane's law; increases the class of vehicular manslaughter in the first and second degrees, aggravated vehicular homicide, and aggravated unlicensed operation in the first degree.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5727
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 15, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. KENNEDY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law  and  the  vehicle  and  traffic  law,  in
  relation  to  increasing  the  class  for certain vehicular crimes and
  enacting Kane's law

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Short  title. This act shall be known and may be cited as
 "Kane's Law".
  § 2. The second undesignated paragraph of section 125.12 of the  penal
 law,  as  amended by chapter 732 of the laws of 2006, is amended to read
 as follows:
  Vehicular manslaughter in the second degree is a class [D] C felony.
  § 3. The second undesignated paragraph of section 125.13 of the  penal
 law,  as  amended by chapter 496 of the laws of 2009, is amended to read
 as follows:
  Vehicular manslaughter in the first degree is a class [C] B felony.
  § 4. The second undesignated paragraph of section 125.14 of the  penal
 law,  as  amended by chapter 496 of the laws of 2009, is amended to read
 as follows:
  Aggravated vehicular homicide is a class [B] A-2 felony.
  § 5. Paragraph (b) of subdivision 3 of section 511 of the vehicle  and
 traffic  law,  as separately amended by chapters 786 and 892 of the laws
 of 1990, is amended to read as follows:
  (b) Aggravated unlicensed operation of a motor vehicle  in  the  first
 degree  is  a  class  [E]  D  felony. When a person is convicted of this
 crime, the sentence of the court must be: (i) a fine in  an  amount  not
 less  than five hundred dollars nor more than five thousand dollars; and
 (ii) a term of imprisonment as provided in the penal law, or (iii) where
 appropriate and a term of imprisonment is not required by the penal law,
 a sentence of probation as provided in subdivision six of this  section,
 or (iv) a term of imprisonment as a condition of a sentence of probation
 as provided in the penal law.
  § 6. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD04940-01-3