# Creates a program to assist municipalities with water quality improvement of water bodies within the municipality managed by lake associations

**Bill ID:** S5728A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pete Harckham
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S5728A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5728A)

## Summary

Creates a program to assist municipalities with water quality improvement of water bodies within the municipality managed by lake associations.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5728
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 15, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HARCKHAM -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN ACT to amend the  environmental  conservation  law,  in  relation  to
  creating  a  program to assist local municipalities with water quality
  improvement of water bodies managed by lake associations

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The environmental conservation law is amended by adding a
 new section 15-0519 to read as follows:
 ยง 15-0519. WATER QUALITY IMPROVEMENT; LAKE ASSOCIATIONS.
  1. SUBJECT TO AN APPROPRIATION FOR SUCH PURPOSE, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL,
 IN CONSULTATION WITH THE ENVIRONMENTAL FACILITIES CORPORATION, CREATE  A
 PROGRAM  TO  ASSIST MUNICIPALITIES TO IMPROVE THE WATER QUALITY IN WATER
 BODIES MANAGED BY LAKE ASSOCIATIONS LOCATED  WITHIN  SUCH  MUNICIPALITY.
 THE PROGRAM SHALL, IN COOPERATION WITH MUNICIPALITIES:
  A.  IDENTIFY  ANY  WATER QUALITY CONCERNS AT A WATER BODY MANAGED BY A
 LAKE ASSOCIATION WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY;
  B. DETERMINE THE MOST EFFECTIVE WAY TO  REMEDIATE  ANY  WATER  QUALITY
 CONCERNS; AND
  C.  ASSIST  WITH  DETERMINING  BEST  PRACTICES TO IMPROVE AND MAINTAIN
 WATER QUALITY OF WATER BODIES MANAGED BY LAKE  ASSOCIATIONS  WITHIN  THE
 MUNICIPALITY.
  2.  THE  DEPARTMENT  SHALL ESTABLISH A GRANT PROGRAM TO ASSIST MUNICI-
 PALITIES WITH REMEDIAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE  WATER  QUALITY  OF  WATER
 BODIES WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY MANAGED BY LAKE ASSOCIATIONS.
  3. THE DEPARTMENT IS AUTHORIZED TO PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS TO
 IMPLEMENT THIS SECTION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment, and/or repeal of any rules and regulations necessary to  implement
 the  provisions  of  this act on its effective date are authorized to be
 made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06994-02-3