# Permits the sale of beer at retail on Sundays; repealer

**Bill ID:** S5731
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Skoufis
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S5731 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5731)

## Summary

Permits the sale of beer at retail on Sundays.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5731
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 15, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SKOUFIS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Investigations and Govern-
  ment Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the alcoholic  beverage  control  law,  in  relation  to
  permitting  the  sale  of  beer  at  retail  on Sundays; and to repeal
  certain provisions of the  alcoholic  beverage  control  law  relating
  thereto
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 105-a of the  alcoholic  beverage  control  law  is
 REPEALED.
  §  2.  Subdivision  4  of section 34 of the alcoholic beverage control
 law, as added by chapter 522 of the laws of 2018, is amended to read  as
 follows:
  4.  No  tasting  shall  be  held  during  the  hours prohibited by the
 provisions of [sections] SECTION  one  hundred  five  [and  one  hundred
 five-a] of this chapter.
  § 3. Subdivision (d) of section 54-b of the alcoholic beverage control
 law,  as added by chapter 232 of the laws of 2015, is amended to read as
 follows:
  (d) No tasting shall be  held  during  the  hours  prohibited  by  the
 provisions  of  [sections]  SECTION  one  hundred  five [and one hundred
 five-a] of this chapter.
  § 4. Subdivision (d) of section 59-a of the alcoholic beverage control
 law, as added by chapter 232 of the laws of 2015, is amended to read  as
 follows:
  (d)  No  tasting  shall  be  held  during  the hours prohibited by the
 provisions of section one hundred five [and one hundred five-a] of  this
 chapter.
  §  5. Subdivision 6 of section 117-a of the alcoholic beverage control
 law is REPEALED.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10155-01-3
 S. 5731  2
 
  § 6. Subdivision 4 of section 130 of the  alcoholic  beverage  control
 law,  as  amended by chapter 186 of the laws of 1949, is amended to read
 as follows:
  4.  In the city of New York, a summons shall be issued for a violation
 of the provisions of subdivision fourteen of section one  hundred  [and]
 five[,  section  one hundred and five-a] and subdivision five of section
 one hundred [and] six of this chapter in the same manner as provided  by
 subdivision  h of section one hundred [and] sixteen of the New York city
 criminal courts act.
  § 7. This act shall take effect immediately.