# Relates to medicaid eligibility for youth leaving court ordered placement

**Bill ID:** S5748
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5748 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5748)

## Summary

Provides that youth leaving court ordered placement (foster care) shall be presumptive eligible for medicaid.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5748
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 15, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. PARKER, JACKSON -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the social services law, in relation to medicaid  eligi-
  bility for youth leaving court ordered placement
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 364-i of the social  services  law  is  amended  by
 adding a new subdivision 9 to read as follows:
  9. YOUTH LEAVING COURT ORDERED PLACEMENT; PRESUMPTIVE ELIGIBILITY. (A)
 NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY  OTHER  PROVISION OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY, YOUTH WHO
 HAVE BEEN PLACED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION TWO, TWO-A, THREE  OR  FOUR  OF
 SECTION  353.3  OR  SECTION  353.5  OF  THE  FAMILY  COURT ACT, SHALL BE
 PRESUMED ELIGIBLE FOR MEDICAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THIS TITLE  BEGINNING  ON
 THE DATE OF THEIR RELEASE FROM SUCH PLACEMENT.
  (B) SUCH PRESUMPTIVE ELIGIBILITY SHALL CONTINUE THROUGH THE EARLIER OF
 THE DAY ON WHICH A DETERMINATION IS MADE WITH RESPECT TO THE ELIGIBILITY
 OF  THE YOUTH FOR ASSISTANCE PURSUANT TO THIS TITLE, OR IN THE CASE OF A
 YOUTH FOR WHOM AN APPLICATION FOR ASSISTANCE PURSUANT TO THIS  TITLE  IS
 NOT  FILED  ON HIS OR HER BEHALF OR WHO DOES NOT FILE AN APPLICATION FOR
 SUCH ASSISTANCE, SIXTY DAYS FROM THE RELEASE OF SUCH YOUTH  FROM  PLACE-
 MENT  ORDERED  PURSUANT  TO  SUBDIVISION  TWO,  TWO-A,  THREE OR FOUR OF
 SECTION 353.3 OR SECTION 353.5 OF THE FAMILY COURT ACT.
  (C) CARE, SERVICES AND SUPPLIES, AS SET FORTH IN SECTION THREE HUNDRED
 SIXTY-FIVE-A OF THIS TITLE, THAT ARE  FURNISHED  TO  A  YOUTH  DURING  A
 PRESUMPTIVE  ELIGIBILITY PERIOD UNDER THIS SUBDIVISION BY AN ENTITY THAT
 IS ELIGIBLE FOR PAYMENTS UNDER THIS TITLE SHALL BE DEEMED TO BE  MEDICAL
 ASSISTANCE FOR PURPOSES OF PAYMENT AND STATE REIMBURSEMENT.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law. Effective immediately the addition, amendment  and/or
 repeal  of  any  rule  or regulation necessary for the implementation of
 this act on its effective date are authorized to be made  on  or  before
 such date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07441-01-3