# Relates to service retirement benefits for uniformed sanitation members of the New York city employees' retirement system

**Bill ID:** S5793AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Jackson
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5793AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5793AA)

## Summary

Provides that for New York city uniformed sanitation revised plan members of the New York city employees' retirement system, the service retirement benefit shall not be reduced by the primary social security retirement benefit commencing at age sixty-two.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5793--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sens. JACKSON, CHU -- read twice and ordered printed, and
  when printed to be committed to the Committee  on  Civil  Service  and
  Pensions -- recommitted to the Committee on Civil Service and Pensions
  in accordance with Senate Rule 6, sec. 8 -- committee discharged, bill
  amended,  ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted to said commit-
  tee
 
 AN ACT to amend the retirement and social security law, in  relation  to
  service  retirement  benefits  for uniformed sanitation members of the
  New York city employees' retirement system
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section 505 of the retirement and social security law, as
 amended by chapter 18 of the  laws  of  2012,  is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  ยง 505. Service retirement benefits; police/fire members, New York city
 uniformed  correction/sanitation  revised  plan members and investigator
 revised plan members. a.  The  normal  service  retirement  benefit  for
 police/fire  members,  New  York  city  uniformed  correction/sanitation
 revised plan members and investigator revised  plan  members  at  normal
 retirement  age shall be a pension equal to fifty percent of final aver-
 age salary, less fifty percent of the primary social security retirement
 benefit commencing at age sixty-two, as provided in section five hundred
 eleven of this article, EXCEPT THAT FOR NEW YORK CITY UNIFORMED  SANITA-
 TION  REVISED  PLAN  MEMBERS  OF THE NEW YORK CITY EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT
 SYSTEM, THE NORMAL SERVICE RETIREMENT BENEFIT SHALL NOT  BE  REDUCED  BY
 THE  PRIMARY SOCIAL SECURITY RETIREMENT BENEFIT COMMENCING AT AGE SIXTY-
 TWO AS PROVIDED IN SECTION FIVE HUNDRED ELEVEN OF THIS ARTICLE.
  b. The early service retirement benefit for police/fire  members,  New
 York  city  uniformed  sanitation  revised plan members and investigator
 revised plan members shall be a pension  equal  to  two  and  one-tenths
 percent  of  final average salary times years of credited service at the
 completion of twenty years of service or upon attainment of  age  sixty-
 two,  increased  by one-third of one percent of final average salary for
 each month of service in excess of twenty years, but not  in  excess  of
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06943-04-4
 S. 5793--A  2
 
 fifty percent of final average salary, less fifty percent of the primary
 social  security  retirement  benefit  commencing  at  age  sixty-two as
 provided in section five  hundred  eleven  of  this  article,  provided,
 however,  that  New York city police/fire revised plan members, New York
 city uniformed sanitation revised plan members and investigator  revised
 plan  members  shall  not be eligible to retire for service prior to the
 attainment of twenty years of credited  service,  AND  PROVIDED  FURTHER
 THAT  FOR NEW YORK CITY UNIFORMED SANITATION REVISED PLAN MEMBERS OF THE
 NEW YORK CITY EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM, THE EARLY SERVICE RETIREMENT
 BENEFIT SHALL NOT BE REDUCED BY THE PRIMARY SOCIAL  SECURITY  RETIREMENT
 BENEFIT  COMMENCING AT AGE SIXTY-TWO AS PROVIDED IN SECTION FIVE HUNDRED
 ELEVEN OF THIS ARTICLE.
  c. A police/fire member, a New York city uniformed sanitation  revised
 plan  member  or  an  investigator  revised plan member who retires with
 twenty-two years of credited service or less  may  become  eligible  for
 annual escalation of the service retirement benefit if he elects to have
 the  payment of his benefit commence on the date he would have completed
 twenty-two years and one month or more of service. In  such  event,  the
 service  retirement  benefit  shall  equal  two percent of final average
 salary for each year of credited service,  less  fifty  percent  of  the
 primary  social  security retirement benefit commencing at age sixty-two
 as provided in section five hundred eleven of this article, EXCEPT  THAT
 FOR  NEW  YORK CITY UNIFORMED SANITATION REVISED PLAN MEMBERS OF THE NEW
 YORK CITY EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM, THE SERVICE  RETIREMENT  BENEFIT
 SHALL  NOT  BE REDUCED BY THE PRIMARY SOCIAL SECURITY RETIREMENT BENEFIT
 COMMENCING AT AGE SIXTY-TWO AS PROVIDED IN SECTION FIVE  HUNDRED  ELEVEN
 OF THIS ARTICLE.
  ยง  2. Section 511 of the retirement and social security law is amended
 by adding a new subdivision h to read as follows:
  H. THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY TO NEW YORK CITY UNIFORMED  SANITATION
 REVISED  PLAN  MEMBERS OF THE NEW YORK CITY EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM
 WHO RECEIVE A  SERVICE  RETIREMENT  BENEFIT  PURSUANT  TO  SECTION  FIVE
 HUNDRED  FIVE  OF  THIS ARTICLE OR A DEFERRED VESTED BENEFIT PURSUANT TO
 SECTION FIVE HUNDRED SIXTEEN OF THIS ARTICLE.
  ยง 3. Subdivision c of section 516 of the retirement and social securi-
 ty law, as amended by chapter 18 of the laws of 2012, is amended to read
 as follows:
  c. The deferred vested benefit of police/fire members, New  York  city
 police/fire  revised  plan  members,  New  York  city  uniformed
 correction/sanitation revised plan members or investigator revised  plan
 members  shall  be a pension commencing at early retirement age equal to
 two and one-tenths percent of final average salary times years of  cred-
 ited  service, less fifty percent of the primary social security retire-
 ment benefit commencing at age sixty-two, as provided  in  section  five
 hundred  eleven of this article, EXCEPT THAT FOR NEW YORK CITY UNIFORMED
 SANITATION REVISED PLAN MEMBERS OF THE NEW YORK CITY EMPLOYEES'  RETIRE-
 MENT  SYSTEM, THE SERVICE RETIREMENT BENEFIT SHALL NOT BE REDUCED BY THE
 PRIMARY SOCIAL SECURITY RETIREMENT BENEFIT COMMENCING AT  AGE  SIXTY-TWO
 AS  PROVIDED  IN  SECTION  FIVE  HUNDRED  ELEVEN  OF  THIS  ARTICLE.  A
 police/fire member, a New York city police/fire revised plan  member,  a
 New  York  city  uniformed  correction/sanitation revised plan member or
 investigator revised plan member may elect to receive his vested benefit
 commencing at early retirement age or  age  fifty-five.  If  the  vested
 benefit  commences  before  early  retirement  age, the benefit shall be
 reduced by one-fifteenth for each year, if any, that the member's  early
 retirement  age is in excess of age sixty, and by one-thirtieth for each
 S. 5793--A  3
 
 additional year by which the vested benefit  commences  prior  to  early
 retirement  age.  If  such  vested  benefit is deferred until after such
 member's normal retirement  age,  the  benefit  shall  be  computed  and
 subject to annual escalation in the same manner as provided for an early
 retirement  benefit  pursuant  to  subdivision c of section five hundred
 five of this article.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect on the sixtieth  day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  SUMMARY: This proposed legislation would amend Sections of the Retire-
 ment and Social Security Law (RSSL) to eliminate the offset equal to 50%
 of  the  primary  social security benefit in the service, early service,
 and vested retirement benefits for certain Tier 3 Sanitation members  of
 NYCERS.
  EXPECTED INCREASE (DECREASE) IN EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS
  by Fiscal Year for the first 25 years ($ in Millions)
  Year  NYCERS
  2025  17.4
  2026  18.5
  2027  19.9
  2028  21.5
  2029  23.1
  2030  24.6
  2031  26.1
  2032  27.4
  2033  29.0
  2034  30.6
  2035  32.0
  2036  33.4
  2037  34.9
  2038  36.3
  2039  37.7
  2040  39.2
  2041  40.7
  2042  35.4
  2043  36.9
  2044  38.4
  2045  40.0
  2046  41.6
  2047  43.2
  2048  44.8
  2049  46.4
  Employer Contribution impact beyond Fiscal Year 2049 is not shown.
  Projected contributions include future new hires that may be impacted.
 The  entire  increase in employer contributions will be allocated to New
 York City.
  EXPECTED INCREASE (DECREASE) IN ACTUARIAL LIABILITIES
  as of June 30, 2023 ($ in Millions)
  Present Value (PV)  NYCERS
  PV of Benefits:  214.5
  PV of Employee Contributions:  0.0
  PV of Employer Contributions:  214.5
  Unfunded Accrued Liabilities:  64.0
  AMORTIZATION OF UNFUNDED ACCRUED LIABILITY
  NYCERS
  Number of Payments:  17
 S. 5793--A  4
 
  Fiscal Year of Last Payment:  2041
  Amortization Payment:  6.8M
 Unfunded  Accrued  Liability  increases were amortized over the expected
 remaining working lifetime of those  impacted  by  the  benefit  changes
 using level dollar payments.
  CENSUS  DATA:  The estimates presented herein are based on preliminary
 census data collected as of June 30,  2023.  The  census  data  for  the
 impacted population is summarized below.
  NYCERS
  Active Members
  - Number Count:  4,627
  - Average Age:  39.2
  - Average Service:  6
  - Average Salary:  89,800
  Term. Vested Members
  - Number Count:  67
  - Average Age:  41.5
  IMPACT  ON  MEMBER  BENEFITS: Currently, Tier 3 normal service retire-
 ment, early service retirement, and vested retirement benefits for Sani-
 tation members in 22-Year Plans are subject to an offset equal to 50% of
 the primary social security benefit  as  defined  in  RSSL  Section  511
 beginning at age 62.
  Under  the proposed legislation, the offset for such benefits would be
 eliminated resulting in an increase in benefits.
  ASSUMPTIONS AND METHODS: The  estimates  presented  herein  have  been
 calculated  based  on the Revised 2021 Actuarial Assumptions and Methods
 of the impacted retirement systems. In addition:
  * New entrants were assumed to replace exiting members so  that  total
 payroll increases by 3% each year for impacted groups. New entrant demo-
 graphics were developed based on data for recent new hires and actuarial
 judgement.
  RISK  AND  UNCERTAINTY: The costs presented in this Fiscal Note depend
 highly on the actuarial assumptions, methods,  and  models  used,  demo-
 graphics  of  the  impacted population and other factors such as invest-
 ment, contribution, and other risks. If actual experience deviates  from
 actuarial  assumptions,  the  actual  costs  could  differ  from  those
 presented herein. Quantifying these risks is beyond the  scope  of  this
 Fiscal Note.
  This  Fiscal  Note  is intended to measure pension-related impacts and
 does not include other potential costs (e.g., administrative  and  Other
 Postemployment Benefits).
  This Fiscal Note does not include cost analyses relating to provisions
 contained in RSSL Section 500(c).
  STATEMENT OF ACTUARIAL OPINION: Marek Tyszkiewicz and Gregory Zelikov-
 sky  are members of the Society of Actuaries and the American Academy of
 Actuaries. We are members of NYCERS but do not believe  it  impairs  our
 objectivity  and  we  meet  the  Qualification Standards of the American
 Academy of Actuaries to render the actuarial opinion  contained  herein.
 To  the  best  of  our knowledge, the results contained herein have been
 prepared in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles  and
 procedures  and  with  the Actuarial Standards of Practice issued by the
 Actuarial Standards Board.
  FISCAL NOTE IDENTIFICATION: This Fiscal Note 2024-06 dated January 22,
 2024 was prepared by the Chief Actuary for the New York City  Retirement
 Systems and Pension Funds. This estimate is intended for use only during
 the 2024 Legislative Session.