# Relates to providing cost-of-living adjustments

**Bill ID:** S5809DD
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew Gounardes
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5809DD PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5809DD)

## Summary

Relates to providing cost-of-living adjustments; increases benefits from fifty to one hundred percent.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5809--D
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. GOUNARDES, ADDABBO, HARCKHAM, THOMAS, WEIK -- read
  twice and ordered printed, and when printed to  be  committed  to  the
  Committee  on Civil Service and Pensions -- committee discharged, bill
  amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted to said  commit-
  tee  --  committee  discharged,  bill  amended,  ordered  reprinted as
  amended and recommitted  to  said  committee  --  recommitted  to  the
  Committee on Civil Service and Pensions in accordance with Senate Rule
  6,  sec. 8 -- committee discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as
  amended and recommitted to said  committee  --  committee  discharged,
  bill  amended,  ordered  reprinted  as amended and recommitted to said
  committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the retirement and social security  law,  the  education
  law  and  the administrative code of the city of New York, in relation
  to providing cost-of-living adjustments
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Subdivision g of section 78-a of the retirement and social
 security law, as added by chapter 125 of the laws of 2000, is amended to
 read as follows:
  g. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, EFFECTIVE THE FIRST DAY
 OF SEPTEMBER, TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY-FIVE,  the  surviving  spouse  of  a
 deceased  retired member who retired under an option which provides that
 benefits are to be continued for life to the surviving spouse after  the
 death  of  the  retired  member,  shall  be entitled to receive benefits
 pursuant to this section. Said benefits shall  be  [fifty]  ONE  HUNDRED
 percent  of  the monthly benefits which the pensioner would be receiving
 pursuant to this section if  living,  and  shall  commence  (i)  with  a
 payment  for  the  month of September, two thousand TWENTY-FIVE, or (ii)
 the month following the death of the deceased retired member,  whichever
 is later.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08560-14-4
 S. 5809--D  2
 
  ยง 2. Subdivision g of section 378-a of the retirement and social secu-
 rity  law,  as  added  by chapter 125 of the laws of 2000, is amended to
 read as follows:
  g. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, EFFECTIVE THE FIRST DAY
 OF  SEPTEMBER,  TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY-FIVE,  the  surviving  spouse of a
 deceased retired member who retired under an option which provides  that
 benefits  are to be continued for life to the surviving spouse after the
 death of the retired member,  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  benefits
 pursuant  to  this  section.  Said benefits shall be [fifty] ONE HUNDRED
 percent of the monthly benefits which the pensioner would  be  receiving
 pursuant  to  this  section  if  living,  and  shall commence (i) with a
 payment for the month of September, two thousand  TWENTY-FIVE,  or  (ii)
 the  month following the death of the deceased retired member, whichever
 is later.
  ยง 3. Subdivision g of section 532-a of the education law, as added  by
 chapter 125 of the laws of 2000, is amended to read as follows:
  g. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, EFFECTIVE THE FIRST DAY
 OF  SEPTEMBER,  TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY-FIVE,  the  surviving  spouse of a
 deceased retired member who retired under an option which provides  that
 benefits  are to be continued for life to the surviving spouse after the
 death of the retired member,  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  benefits
 pursuant  to  this  section.  Said benefits shall be [fifty] ONE HUNDRED
 percent of the monthly benefits which the pensioner would  be  receiving
 pursuant  to  this  section  if  living,  and  shall commence (i) with a
 payment for the month of September, two thousand  TWENTY-FIVE,  or  (ii)
 the  month following the death of the deceased retired member, whichever
 is later.
  ยง 4. Subdivision g of section 13-696 of the administrative code of the
 city of New York, as added by chapter  125  of  the  laws  of  2000,  is
 amended to read as follows:
  g. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, EFFECTIVE THE FIRST DAY
 OF  SEPTEMBER,  TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY-FIVE,  the  surviving  spouse of a
 deceased retired member of  the  New  York  city  employees'  retirement
 system, the New York city teachers' retirement system, the New York city
 police  pension  fund, the New York city fire department pension fund or
 the New York city board of education retirement system who retired under
 an option which provides that benefits are to be continued for  life  to
 the surviving spouse after the death of the member, shall be entitled to
 receive  a  benefit  pursuant  to  this  section.  Said benefit shall be
 [fifty] ONE HUNDRED percent of the monthly benefit which  the  pensioner
 would  be receiving if living, and shall commence (i) with a payment for
 the month of September, two thousand  TWENTY-FIVE,  or  (ii)  the  month
 following the death of the deceased retired member, whichever is later.
  ยง 5. This act shall take effect immediately.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  This  bill  would  provide an increase in the defined benefit cost-of-
 living adjustment (COLA) for New York public retirement systems.  Start-
 ing with a payment in September 2025, the cost-of-living benefit payable
 to  a  surviving  spouse who is eligible for COLA will be increased from
 fifty percent to one hundred percent of the benefit that  the  pensioner
 would have received.
  Insofar  as  this bill affects the New York State and Local Employees'
 Retirement System (NYSLERS), pursuant to Section 25  of  the  Retirement
 and  Social Security Law, the increased costs would be borne entirely by
 the State of New York and would require an itemized appropriation suffi-
 cient to pay the cost of the provision. If this bill were enacted during
 S. 5809--D  3

 the 2024 Legislative Session, the increase in the present value of bene-
 fits would be approximately $1.7 billion.
  In the NYSLERS, this benefit improvement will be funded by (1) billing
 a  past  service  cost  to cover retrospective benefit increases and (2)
 increasing the billing rates charged annually to cover prospective bene-
 fit increases, as follows:
  (1) To fund retrospective  costs,  the  State  of  New  York  will  be
 required to pay $1.82 billion (including interest) as of March 1, 2025.
  (2) To fund prospective costs, the annual contribution required of all
 participating  employers  in  NYSLERS  is  0.03%  of billable salary, or
 approximately $4.4 million to the State of New  York  and  approximately
 $6.6 million to the local participating employers.  This permanent annu-
 al cost will vary in subsequent billing cycles with changes in the bill-
 ing rate and salary of the affected members.
  Insofar  as  this bill affects the New York State and Local Police and
 Fire Retirement System (NYSLPFRS), the increased costs would  be  shared
 by  the  State  of New York and the local participating employers in the
 NYSLPFRS. If this bill were enacted during the 2024 Legislative Session,
 the increase in the present value of  benefits  would  be  approximately
 $180 million.
  NYSLPFRS  Increase in present  Increase in required
  value benefits  contributions
 
  Tiers 1-5  $173 million  $86 million
  Tier 6  $7 million  $94 million
  Total  $180 million  $180 million
 
  In the NYSLPFRS, this benefit improvement will be funded by increasing
 the  billing  rates  charged  annually  to  cover both retrospective and
 prospective benefit increases.  The annual contribution required of  all
 participating  employers  in  NYSLPFRS  is  0.4%  of billable salary, or
 approximately $3.4 million to the State of New  York  and  approximately
 $14  million to the local participating employers. This permanent annual
 cost will vary in subsequent billing cycles with changes in the  billing
 rate and salary of the affected members.
  Summary of relevant resources:
  Membership  data as of March 31, 2023 was used in measuring the impact
 of the proposed change, the same data used in the April 1, 2023 actuari-
 al valuation.  Distributions and other statistics can be  found  in  the
 2023  Report  of the Actuary and the 2023 Annual Comprehensive Financial
 Report.
  The actuarial assumptions and methods used are described in  the  2023
 Annual  Report  to  the  Comptroller  on  Actuarial Assumptions, and the
 Codes, Rules and Regulations  of  the  State  of  New  York:  Audit  and
 Control.
  The Market Assets and GASB Disclosures are found in the March 31, 2023
 New  York  State  and  Local  Retirement System Financial Statements and
 Supplementary Information.
  I am a member of the American Academy of Actuaries and meet the Quali-
 fication Standards to render the actuarial opinion contained herein.
  This fiscal note does not constitute a legal opinion on the  viability
 of  the  proposed change nor is it intended to serve as a substitute for
 the professional judgment of an attorney.
  This estimate, dated January 26,  2024,  and  intended  for  use  only
 during  the  2024  Legislative  Session,  is  Fiscal  Note  No. 2024-45,
 S. 5809--D  4
 
 prepared by the Actuary for the New  York  State  and  Local  Retirement
 System.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  As  it relates to the New York State Teachers' Retirement System, this
 bill would amend subdivision g of Section 532-a of the Education Law  to
 increase  the  cost-of-living  adjustment  (COLA)  benefit  to surviving
 spouse beneficiaries of deceased retirees who elected  an  option  which
 provides a lifetime benefit to their surviving spouse. The COLA survivor
 benefit  would be equal to 100% of the monthly benefit which the retiree
 would be receiving if alive. The current COLA survivor benefit is  equal
 to  50%  of  the  benefit  the retiree would be receiving if alive. This
 increase in spousal survivor benefit would also  be  applicable  to  the
 "catch-up"  supplementation  provided  under  subdivision  f to eligible
 retirees who retired before January 1, 1997.  This  benefit  improvement
 would be effective in September of 2025.
  The annual cost to the employers of members of NYSTRS for this benefit
 is  estimated  to  be  $42.0 million or 0.22% of payroll if this bill is
 enacted.
  Member data is from the System's most recent actuarial valuation files
 as of June 30, 2023, consisting of data provided by the employers to the
 Retirement System. The most recent data distributions and statistics can
 be found in the System's Annual Report for fiscal year  ended  June  30,
 2023. System assets are as reported in the System's financial statements
 and  can  also be found in the System's Annual Report. Actuarial assump-
 tions and methods are  provided  in  the  System's  Actuarial  Valuation
 Report as of June 30, 2023.
  The  source  of  this estimate is Fiscal Note 2024-8 dated February 2,
 2024 prepared by the Office of the Actuary of the New York State  Teach-
 ers'  Retirement  System  and  is  intended for use only during the 2024
 Legislative Session. I, Richard A. Young, am the Chief Actuary  for  the
 New  York State Teachers' Retirement System. I am a member of the Ameri-
 can Academy of Actuaries and I meet the Qualification Standards  of  the
 American  Academy of Actuaries to render the actuarial opinion contained
 herein.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  SUMMARY: This proposed legislation, as it relates to the New York City
 Retirement Systems and Pension Funds (NYCRS), would increase  the  Cost-
 of-Living Adjustment (COLA), effective September 1, 2025, to an eligible
 surviving  spouse  from  50%  to 100% of the COLA the pensioner would be
 receiving if still alive.
 
  EXPECTED INCREASE (DECREASE) IN EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS
  by Fiscal Year for the first 25 years ($ in Millions)

  Year  NYCERS  TRS  BERS  POLICE  FIRE  TOTAL
 
  2025  446.9  188.7  20.7  43.9  12.0  712.2
  2026  8.3  2.7  0.3  0.6  0.2  12.1
  2027  8.3  2.7  0.3  0.6  0.2  12.1
  2028  8.2  2.7  0.3  0.6  0.2  12.0
  2029  8.2  2.7  0.3  0.5  0.2  11.9
  2030  8.2  2.6  0.3  0.5  0.2  11.8
  2031  8.1  2.6  0.3  0.5  0.2  11.7
  2032  8.1  2.6  0.3  0.5  0.2  11.7
  2033  8.1  2.6  0.3  0.5  0.2  11.7
 S. 5809--D  5
 
  2034  8.1  2.6  0.3  0.5  0.2  11.7
  2035  8.1  2.6  0.3  0.5  0.2  11.7
  2036  8.1  2.6  0.1  0.5  0.2  11.5
  2037  3.3  2.6  0.1  0.2  0.1  6.3
  2038  3.3  2.6  0.1  0.2  0.1  6.3
  2039  3.3  1.0  0.1  0.2  0.1  4.7
  2040  3.3  1.0  0.1  0.2  0.1  4.7
  2041  3.4  1.0  0.2  0.2  0.1  4.9
  2042  3.4  1.0  0.2  0.2  0.1  4.9
  2043  3.4  1.0  0.2  0.2  0.1  4.9
  2044  3.5  1.0  0.2  0.2  0.1  5.0
  2045  3.5  1.0  0.2  0.2  0.1  5.0
  2046  3.5  1.0  0.2  0.2  0.1  5.0
  2047  3.6  1.0  0.2  0.2  0.1  5.1
  2048  3.6  1.1  0.2  0.2  0.1  5.2
  2049  3.7  1.1  0.2  0.2  0.1  5.3
 
  Employer  Contribution  impact  beyond  Fiscal Year 2049 is not shown.
 Projected contributions include future new hires that may be impacted.
 
  The initial increase in employer contributions of  $712.2  million  is
 estimated  to be $460.7 million for New York City and $251.5 million for
 the other obligors of NYCRS.
 
  INITIAL INCREASE (DECREASE) IN ACTUARIAL LIABILITIES
  as of June 30, 2023 ($ in Millions)
 
 Present Value (PV)  NYCERS TRS  BERS  POLICE  FIRE
 
 PV of Benefits:  459.7  191.1  20.9  43.5  12.6
 PV of Employee Contributions:  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0
 PV of Employer Contributions:  459.7  191.1  20.9  43.5  12.6
 Unfunded Accrued Liabilities:  433.2  181.6  19.8  41.6  11.7

  AMORTIZATION OF UNFUNDED ACCRUED LIABILITY
 
  NYCERS  TRS  BERS  POLICE  FIRE
 
 Number of Payments:  12  14  11  12  12
 Fiscal Year of Last Payment:  2036  2038  2035  2036  2036
 Amortization Payment:  4.8 M  1.6 M  0.2 M  0.3 M  0.1 M
 Additional One-time Payment:  438.6 M  186.0 M 20.4 M  43.3 M  11.8 M
 
  Unfunded Accrued Liability (UAL) increases  for  active  members  were
 amortized over the expected remaining working lifetime of those impacted
 by  the benefit changes using level dollar payments. UAL attributable to
 terminated vested members and current retirees  was  recognized  in  the
 first year.
  CENSUS  DATA:  The estimates presented herein are based on preliminary
 census data collected as of June 30,  2023.  The  census  data  for  the
 impacted population is summarized below.
 
  NYCERS  TRS  BERS  POLICE  FIRE
 
 Active Members
 - Number Count:  180,354  124,368  24,613  33,800  10,720
 S. 5809--D  6
 
 - Average Age:  47.8  44.4  51.4  37.6  40.8
 - Average Service:  11.8  12.3  9.7  11.3  13.9
 - Average Salary:  88,800  98,500  59,700  128,600 139,500
 Term. Vested Members
 - Number Count:  28,133  21,830  2,885  1,493  59
 - Average Age:  51.8  47.0  51.9  38.2  43.9
 Receiving Members
 - Number Count:  43,599  26,140  3,099  4,354  1,150
 - Average Age:  74.1  75.3  75.9  65.0  68.6
 
  IMPACT  ON MEMBER BENEFITS: The surviving spouse of a deceased retired
 member who retired under an option which provides that benefits  are  to
 be  continued  for  life  to the surviving spouse after the death of the
 retired member is currently entitled to receive a COLA equal to  50%  of
 the  COLA  the  pensioner  would be receiving if living.  This proposed
 legislation would change from 50% to  100%  the  percentage  of  COLA  a
 surviving spouse receives after the death of the retired member.
  ASSUMPTIONS  AND  METHODS:  The  estimates  presented herein have been
 calculated based on the Revised 2021 Actuarial Assumptions  and  Methods
 of the impacted retirement systems. In addition:
  * Assumptions for active members electing a form of pension at retire-
 ment  that  would continue a payment to a surviving spouse (ranging from
 15% to 30%) were made based on the distribution of current elections and
 an estimate of future elections.
  * New entrants were assumed to replace exiting members so  that  total
 payroll increases by 3% each year for impacted groups. New entrant demo-
 graphics were developed based on data for recent new hires and actuarial
 judgement.
  RISK  AND  UNCERTAINTY: The costs presented in this Fiscal Note depend
 highly on the actuarial assumptions, methods,  and  models  used,  demo-
 graphics  of  the impacted population; and other factors such as invest-
 ment, contribution, and other risks. If actual experience deviates  from
 actuarial  assumptions,  the  actual  costs  could  differ  from  those
 presented herein. Quantifying these risks is beyond the  scope  of  this
 Fiscal Note.
  This  Fiscal  Note  is intended to measure pension-related impacts and
 does not include other potential costs (e.g., administrative  and  Other
 Postemployment Benefits).  This Fiscal Note does not reflect any chapter
 laws that may have been enacted during the current legislative session.
  STATEMENT OF ACTUARIAL OPINION: Marek Tyszkiewicz and Gregory Zelikov-
 sky  are members of the Society of Actuaries and the American Academy of
 Actuaries. We are members of NYCERS but do not believe  it  impairs  our
 objectivity  and  we  meet  the  Qualification Standards of the American
 Academy of Actuaries to render the actuarial opinion  contained  herein.
 To  the  best  of  our knowledge, the results contained herein have been
 prepared in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles  and
 procedures  and  with  the Actuarial Standards of Practice issued by the
 Actuarial Standards Board.
  FISCAL NOTE IDENTIFICATION: This Fiscal Note  2024-74  dated  June  5,
 2024  was prepared by the Chief Actuary for the New York City Retirement
 Systems and Pension Funds. This estimate is intended for use only during
 the 2024 Legislative Session.