# Relates to hunting deer with a crossbow

**Bill ID:** S5802AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John Mannion
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S5802AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5802AA)

## Summary

Allows for the hunting of deer by individuals age sixty and older with a crossbow in a special archery season.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5802--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 16, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. MANNION, ASHBY, GALLIVAN, O'MARA, STEC, WALCZYK --
  read twice and ordered printed, and when printed to  be  committed  to
  the  Committee  on  Environmental  Conservation  -- recommitted to the
  Committee on Environmental Conservation in accordance with Senate Rule
  6, sec. 8 -- committee discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted  as
  amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the environmental conservation law, in relation to the
  hunting of deer with a crossbow
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Paragraphs 2 and 3 of subdivision 3 of section 11-0701 of
 the environmental conservation law, as amended by section 1-a of part  R
 of  chapter 58 of the laws of 2013, are amended and a new paragraph 4 is
 added to read as follows:
  (2) who is eighteen years of age or older to hunt wild deer  and  bear
 with  a  longbow,  as  provided  in title [9] NINE of this article, in a
 special longbow season; [and]
  (3) who is sixteen or seventeen years of  age  to  exercise  the  same
 privileges  subject to the provisions of section 11-0929 and subdivision
 3 of section 11-0713 of this article[.]; AND
  (4) WHO IS SIXTY YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER TO HUNT DEER WITH  A  CROSSBOW,
 AS  PROVIDED IN TITLE NINE OF THIS ARTICLE, IN A SPECIAL ARCHERY SEASON.
 THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ALLOW THE HUNTING OF  DEER  BY
 THE  USE  OF  A  CROSSBOW TO ANY PERSON SIXTY YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER IN A
 SPECIAL ARCHERY SEASON, SUBJECT TO SUCH RESTRICTIONS AS  THE  DEPARTMENT
 MAY  ADOPT BY REGULATION. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS REQUIR-
 ING DOCUMENTATION TO ESTABLISH THAT AN APPLICANT IS ELIGIBLE  TO  USE  A
 CROSSBOW PURSUANT TO THIS PARAGRAPH.
  ยง  2.  This act shall take effect June 1, 2025. Effective immediately,
 the addition, amendment, and/or repeal of any rule or regulation  neces-
 sary  for  the  implementation  of  this  act  on its effective date are
 authorized to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10308-02-4