# Relates to the eligibility criteria for a license to barber

**Bill ID:** S5837
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Sanders Jr.
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5837 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5837)

## Summary

Relates to the eligibility criteria for a license to barber; includes non-violent felonies as a criminal conviction that the secretary of state shall not automatically disqualify an applicant over.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5837
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 20, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SANDERS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Consumer Protection
 
 AN ACT to amend the general business law, in relation to the eligibility
  criteria for a license to barber
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Paragraph (b) of subdivision 1 of section 434 of the gener-
 al  business  law,  as  amended  by  chapter 469 of the laws of 2008, is
 amended to read as follows:
  (b) Satisfactory evidence of good  moral  character,  except  that  in
 determining  an applicant's good moral character, the secretary of state
 shall not automatically disqualify an applicant on the basis of a crimi-
 nal conviction, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO NON-VIOLENT FELONIES.  The
 secretary shall review such criminal history information  in  accordance
 with article twenty-three-A of the correction law;
  ยง  2.  Subdivision  3  of  section 438 of the general business law, as
 amended by chapter 469 of the laws  of  2008,  is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  3.  An applicant for a barber shop owner's license must establish that
 he or she is the real owner and possesses title to or is entitled to the
 possession of the shop. He or she must furnish satisfactory evidence  of
 proper  location  of  the shop, proper layout and adequate equipment for
 the shop, sanitary conditions in the shop  and  its  surroundings.  Such
 applicant  must also furnish satisfactory evidence of good moral charac-
 ter, except that in determining an applicant's good moral character, the
 secretary of state shall not automatically disqualify  an  applicant  on
 the  basis  of a criminal conviction, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO NON-
 VIOLENT FELONIES.  The secretary shall  review  such  criminal  history
 information  in accordance with article twenty-three-A of the correction
 law.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09515-01-3