# Relates to requiring 911 operators to ask callers for the approximate height and weight of the patient

**Bill ID:** S5844
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Sanders Jr.
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5844 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5844)

## Summary

Relates to requiring 911 operators to ask callers for the approximate height and weight of the patient.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5844
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 20, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SANDERS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Local Government
 
 AN ACT to amend the county law and the administrative code of  the  city
  of New York, in relation to requiring 911 operators to ask callers for
  the approximate height and weight of the patient

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 4 of section 328 of the county law  is  amended
 by adding a new paragraph (c) to read as follows:
  (C) IN ADDITION, THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT AND REQUIRE THAT ALL 911 OPERA-
 TORS  WHO  RECEIVE  AN  EMERGENCY  CALL  THAT REQUIRES FIRE OR EMERGENCY
 SERVICE PERSONNEL TO BE DISPATCHED TO AID A PATIENT, SHALL ASK THE CALL-
 ER FOR THE APPROXIMATE HEIGHT AND WEIGHT OF THE PATIENT, WHEN  PRACTICA-
 BLE,  AND  GIVE  THAT  INFORMATION  TO  THE  FIRE  OR  EMERGENCY SERVICE
 DISPATCHER. ADDITIONALLY, IN THE EVENT SUCH 911 OPERATOR  TRANSFERS  THE
 EMERGENCY CALL TO FIRE OR EMERGENCY SERVICE DISPATCHERS PRIOR TO OBTAIN-
 ING  THE  HEIGHT AND WEIGHT INFORMATION OF THE PATIENT THE FIRE OR EMER-
 GENCY SERVICE DISPATCHER SHALL ASK THE CALLER FOR THE APPROXIMATE HEIGHT
 AND WEIGHT OF THE PATIENT, WHEN PRACTICABLE.
  ยง 2. The administrative code of the city of New  York  is  amended  by
 adding a new section 14-146 to read as follows:
  ยง  14-146 911 EMERGENCY CALL PATIENT INFORMATION.  WHEN A 911 OPERATOR
 RECEIVES AN EMERGENCY CALL  THAT  REQUIRES  FIRE  OR  EMERGENCY  SERVICE
 PERSONNEL  TO BE DISPATCHED TO AID A PATIENT, THE 911 OPERATOR SHALL ASK
 THE CALLER FOR THE APPROXIMATE HEIGHT AND WEIGHT OF  THE  PATIENT,  WHEN
 PRACTICABLE,  AND GIVE THAT INFORMATION TO THE FIRE OR EMERGENCY SERVICE
 DISPATCHER. IN THE EVENT THE 911 OPERATOR TRANSFERS THE  EMERGENCY  CALL
 TO  FIRE  OR EMERGENCY SERVICE DISPATCHERS PRIOR TO OBTAINING THE HEIGHT
 AND WEIGHT INFORMATION OF THE PATIENT, THE  FIRE  OR  EMERGENCY  SERVICE
 DISPATCHER SHALL ASK THE CALLER FOR THE APPROXIMATE HEIGHT AND WEIGHT OF
 THE PATIENT, WHEN PRACTICABLE.
  ยง  3.  This  act  shall take effect on the sixtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09523-01-3