# Establishes a personal income tax credit for taxpayers who donate blood to a blood bank four or more times in a year

**Bill ID:** S5859
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5859 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5859)

## Summary

Establishes a personal income tax credit for taxpayers who donate blood to a blood bank four or more times in a year; specifies such tax credit to be five hundred dollars.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5859
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 20, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. PARKER, KENNEDY -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Budget and Reven-
  ue
 
 AN ACT to amend the tax law, in relation to providing a tax  credit  for
  certain taxpayers who donate blood
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 606 of the tax law  is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 subsection (ooo) to read as follows:
  (OOO)  BLOOD  DONATION CREDIT. (1) ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT. A TAXPAYER WHO
 DONATES BLOOD FOUR OR MORE TIMES IN A YEAR TO A BLOOD BANK THAT HAS BEEN
 ISSUED A VALID PERMIT AS PROVIDED IN SECTION FIVE  HUNDRED  SEVENTY-FIVE
 OF  THE  PUBLIC  HEALTH  LAW  SHALL  BE  ALLOWED A CREDIT AS HEREINAFTER
 PROVIDED, AGAINST THE TAX IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE.  THE  AMOUNT  OF  THE
 CREDIT  SHALL  BE  FIVE  HUNDRED  DOLLARS.  FOR  THE  PURPOSES  OF  THIS
 SUBSECTION, "BLOOD BANK" MEANS A FACILITY FOR THE  COLLECTION,  PROCESS-
 ING,  STORAGE  AND/OR  DISTRIBUTION  OF HUMAN BLOOD, BLOOD COMPONENTS OR
 BLOOD DERIVATIVES.
  (2) APPLICATION OF CREDIT. IF THE AMOUNT OF THE CREDIT  ALLOWED  UNDER
 THIS SUBSECTION FOR ANY TAXABLE YEAR SHALL EXCEED THE TAXPAYER'S TAX FOR
 SUCH  YEAR,  THE  EXCESS SHALL BE TREATED AS AN OVERPAYMENT OF TAX TO BE
 CREDITED OR REFUNDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS  OF  SECTION  SIX
 HUNDRED  EIGHTY-SIX OF THIS ARTICLE, PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT NO INTEREST
 SHALL BE PAID THEREON.
  (3) PROOF OF CLAIM. THE COMMISSIONER MAY REQUIRE A QUALIFIED  TAXPAYER
 TO  FURNISH PROOF OF HIS OR HER BLOOD DONATIONS IN SUPPORT OF HIS OR HER
 CLAIM FOR CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately and shall apply to taxable
 years beginning on and after January 1, 2025.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07445-01-3