# Requires certain candidates to file a statement attesting to the veracity of statements regarding the candidate's educational history, and service, employment and residency record

**Bill ID:** S5884C
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John Liu
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S5884C PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5884C)

## Summary

Requires certain candidates to file a statement attesting to the veracity of statements regarding the candidate's educational history, and service, employment and residency record; provides for the filing of amended statements; provides penalties.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5884
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 21, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  LIU  --  read  twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Elections
 
 AN ACT to amend the election  law,  in  relation  to  requiring  certain
  candidates  to file a statement attesting that they meet the residency
  requirements of the office

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The election law is amended by adding a new section 6-170
 to read as follows:
  ยง 6-170. DESIGNATING PETITIONS AND INDEPENDENT  NOMINATION  PETITIONS;
 STATEMENT OF CANDIDATES. ANY DESIGNATING PETITION PREPARED IN ACCORDANCE
 WITH  SECTION  6-132  OF THIS ARTICLE OR INDEPENDENT NOMINATION PETITION
 PREPARED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION  6-140  OF  THIS  ARTICLE  SHALL  BE
 ACCOMPANIED  BY  A  SWORN STATEMENT OF THE CANDIDATE BEING DESIGNATED OR
 NOMINATED. SUCH STATEMENT SHALL INCLUDE AN ATTESTATION BY THE  CANDIDATE
 THAT THEY MEET THE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS OF THE OFFICE THEY ARE SEEKING
 AND THAT THEIR RESIDENTIAL ADDRESS, AS CONTAINED WITHIN THE PETITION, IS
 ACCURATE AND TRUE.  SUCH STATEMENT SHALL BE ATTESTED TO BY THE CANDIDATE
 UNDER PENALTY OF PERJURY, NOTARIZED AND FILED WITH THE DESIGNATING PETI-
 TION OR INDEPENDENT NOMINATION PETITION.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the ninetieth day after it shall
 have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or
 repeal of any rule or regulation necessary  for  the  implementation  of
 this  act  on its effective date are authorized to be made and completed
 on or before such effective date.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09321-03-3