# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "SP4 Herman Emil Anders, Jr. Memorial Bridge"

**Bill ID:** S5937BB
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Peter Oberacker
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S5937BB PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5937BB)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system constituting the bridge on state route 79, crossing over the Chenango River and connecting the town of Greene, county of Chenango, with the town of Fenton, county of Broome, as the "SP4 Herman Emil Anders, Jr. Memorial Bridge".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5937--B
  Cal. No. 462
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. OBERACKER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation -- reported
  favorably  from  said  committee,  ordered to first and second report,
  ordered to a third reading, amended and ordered  reprinted,  retaining
  its  place in the order of third reading -- recommitted to the Commit-
  tee on Transportation in accordance with Senate  Rule  6,  sec.  8  --
  reported  favorably  from  said committee, ordered to first and second
  report, ordered to a third reading,  amended  and  ordered  reprinted,
  retaining its place in the order of third reading
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the  state highway system as the "SP4 Herman Emil Anders, Jr. Memorial
  Bridge"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-p to
 read as follows:
  ยง  344-P.  PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "SP4 HERMAN EMIL ANDERS, JR. MEMORIAL BRIDGE". ALL THAT PORTION  OF  THE
 STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM CONSTITUTING THE BRIDGE ON STATE ROUTE 79, CROSSING
 OVER  THE  CHENANGO  RIVER  AND CONNECTING THE TOWN OF GREENE, COUNTY OF
 CHENANGO, WITH THE TOWN OF FENTON, COUNTY OF BROOME, SHALL BE DESIGNATED
 AND KNOWN AS THE "SP4 HERMAN EMIL ANDERS, JR. MEMORIAL BRIDGE".
  ยง 2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the  instal-
 lation  and  maintenance of adequate signing of the state highway system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this  act.  However,  to  avoid
 confusion  and  to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the desig-
 nation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall  be  one  of
 ceremonial  nature  and  the  official  name of such bridge shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08089-05-4