# Modifies the order in which candidates appear on the ballot

**Bill ID:** S5943
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Skoufis
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S5943 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5943)

## Summary

Modifies the order in which candidates appear on the ballot; requires that offices shall be listed on the ballot in descending order based on the size of the electorate and requires certain federal offices to be listed before state, county or local offices.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5943
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. SKOUFIS, COMRIE, LIU, MYRIE, PERSAUD -- read twice
  and ordered printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee
  on Elections
 
 AN ACT to amend the election law, in relation  to  the  order  in  which
  candidates appear on the ballot
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 11 of section 7-104 of  the  election  law,  as
 added by chapter 411 of the laws of 2019, is amended to read as follows:
  11.  [The  offices  appearing  on  all  ballots shall be listed in the
 customary order] (A) THE OFFICES APPEARING ON ALL BALLOTS SHALL BE LIST-
 ED IN THE ORDER OF PRECEDENCE, AS  APPLICABLE  TO  THE  OFFICES  UP  FOR
 ELECTION  IN  ANY  GIVEN  YEAR, AS FOLLOWS:  ELECTORS FOR PRESIDENT AND
 VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, GOVERNOR AND  LIEUTENANT  GOVERNOR,
 NEW  YORK  STATE  COMPTROLLER,  NEW  YORK STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL, UNITED
 STATES SENATOR, MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, NEW  YORK  STATE
 SENATOR, MEMBER OF THE NEW YORK STATE ASSEMBLY.  ANY OFFICE WHICH IS NOT
 LISTED  IN  THIS  PARAGRAPH SHALL NOT APPEAR ON THE BALLOT IN A POSITION
 BEFORE OR AHEAD OF AN OFFICE WHICH IS LISTED.
  (B) IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING THE OFFICES IN PARAGRAPH (A) OF THIS  SUBDI-
 VISION, ALL OTHER OFFICES SHALL BE PLACED UPON THE BALLOT IN THE CUSTOM-
 ARY  ORDER;  PROVIDED,  FURTHER, THAT PARTISAN OFFICES REGARDLESS OF THE
 SIZE OF THE CONSTITUENCY SHALL BE LISTED BEFORE OR AHEAD OF  NONPARTISAN
 OFFICES  AND  ALL CANDIDATES FOR JUDICIAL OFFICES SHALL FOLLOW ALL OTHER
 PARTISAN OFFICES.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the first of January next  succeed-
 ing the date on which it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03289-01-3