# Requires a consultation prior to the discharge of medically fragile young adults

**Bill ID:** S5969A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pete Harckham
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S5969A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S5969A)

## Summary

Relates to medically fragile young adults and pediatric specialized nursing facilities; allows for such young adults to remain in such facilities from age twenty-one until age thirty-six.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  5969
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 23, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HARCKHAM -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to medically  fragile
  young adults and pediatric specialized nursing facilities
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The public health law is amended by adding  a  new  section
 2831 to read as follows:
  ยง  2831.  MEDICALLY  FRAGILE  YOUNG  ADULTS.  1.  FOR PURPOSES OF THIS
 SECTION, "MEDICALLY FRAGILE YOUNG ADULTS" SHALL HAVE THE SAME MEANING AS
 THE TERM "MEDICALLY  FRAGILE  CHILDREN"  AS  SET  FORTH  IN  SUBDIVISION
 THREE-A OF SECTION THIRTY-SIX HUNDRED FOURTEEN OF THIS CHAPTER AND SHALL
 INCLUDE  MEDICALLY FRAGILE YOUNG ADULTS WHO CURRENTLY RESIDE AT A PEDIA-
 TRIC SPECIALIZED NURSING FACILITY AND ARE OVER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE.
  2. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROMULGATE  RULES  AND  REGULATIONS  TO  ALLOW
 MEDICALLY FRAGILE YOUNG ADULTS WHO RESIDE IN PEDIATRIC SPECIALIZED NURS-
 ING  FACILITIES  TO  REMAIN AT SUCH FACILITIES AFTER REACHING THE AGE OF
 TWENTY-ONE AND UNTIL THEY REACH THE AGE OF THIRTY-SIX. THE REIMBURSEMENT
 METHODOLOGY MUST REMAIN THE SAME AS IT WAS PRIOR TO  REACHING  SUCH  AGE
 AND  INCLUDE  A  DAILY PER DIEM RATE AND COVERAGE FOR BEDHOLDS. MEDICAID
 REIMBURSEMENT FOR THIS POPULATION FOR RESERVED BEDS DUE TO  HOSPITALIZA-
 TION  AND  FOR  THERAPEUTIC AND HOSPICE LEAVES OF ABSENCE MUST REMAIN AT
 ONE HUNDRED PERCENT OF THE MEDICAID RATE OF MEDICALLY FRAGILE  CHILDREN.
 THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT INSTITUTE A DAILY LIMIT AT EACH FACILITY FOR THIS
 POPULATION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation of this act on its effective date are authorized to be  made  and
 completed on or before such date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08318-01-3