# Relates to the criminal sale of a controlled substance to a person less than fourteen years of age

**Bill ID:** S6019
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Patricia Canzoneri-Fitzpatrick
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S6019 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S6019)

## Summary

Relates to the criminal sale of a controlled substance to a person less than fourteen years of age.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6019
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CANZONERI-FITZPATRICK  --  read  twice and ordered
  printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to the  criminal  sale  of  a
  controlled substance to a person less than fourteen years of age

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 220.48 of the penal law, as added by section 28  of
 part  AAA  of  chapter  56  of  the  laws of 2009, is amended to read as
 follows:
 ยง 220.48 Criminal sale of a controlled  substance  to  a  child  IN  THE
  SECOND DEGREE.
  A  person  is  guilty  of criminal sale of a controlled substance to a
 child IN THE SECOND DEGREE when, being over twenty-one years old, he  or
 she  knowingly  and unlawfully sells a controlled substance in violation
 of section 220.34 or 220.39 of this article to a person less than seven-
 teen years old.
  Criminal sale of a controlled substance  to  a  child  IN  THE  SECOND
 DEGREE is a class B felony.
  ยง  2.  The penal law is amended by adding a new section 220.49 to read
 as follows:
 ยง 220.49 CRIMINAL SALE OF A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TO A CHILD IN THE FIRST
  DEGREE.
  A PERSON IS GUILTY OF CRIMINAL SALE OF A  CONTROLLED  SUBSTANCE  TO  A
 CHILD IN THE FIRST DEGREE WHEN, BEING OVER EIGHTEEN YEARS OLD, HE OR SHE
 KNOWINGLY  AND  UNLAWFULLY  SELLS A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE IN VIOLATION OF
 SECTION 220.34 OR 220.39 OF THIS ARTICLE TO A PERSON LESS THAN  FOURTEEN
 YEARS OLD.
  CRIMINAL SALE OF A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TO A CHILD IN THE FIRST DEGREE
 IS A CLASS A-II FELONY.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09158-01-3