# Prohibits the disclosure of contact information of seniors who visit senior centers

**Bill ID:** S6032
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S6032 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S6032)

## Summary

Expands the type of information that is exempt from disclosure to include the name, address, telephone number, or email address of anyone who is a member of or enrolled in a program at a senior center that a public agency administers or sponsors.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6032
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  PARKER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Aging
 
 AN ACT to amend the elder law, in relation to  the  privacy  of  contact
  information of senior center members
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The elder law is amended by adding a  new  section  226  to
 read as follows:
  ยง  226.  PRIVACY OF SENIOR CENTER VISITOR RECORDS. 1. DEFINITIONS.  AS
 USED IN THIS SECTION:
  (A) "SENIOR CENTER" SHALL MEAN FACILITIES OPERATED BY AN  AREA  OFFICE
 OF  THE  AGING  OR  OPERATED  BY  AN ENTITY THAT HAS CONTRACTED WITH THE
 OFFICE OR MUNICIPALITY TO PROVIDE SERVICES TO SENIOR CITIZENS ON A REGU-
 LAR BASIS INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED  TO  MEALS,  RECREATION  AND  COUN-
 SELING.
  (B) "CONTACT INFORMATION" SHALL MEAN NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONE NUMBER OF
 SENIOR CITIZENS.
  2.  CONFIDENTIALITY  OF RECORDS. NOTWITHSTANDING THE PROVISIONS OF ANY
 OTHER LAW, CONTACT INFORMATION OF SENIORS  WHO  VISIT  A  SENIOR  CENTER
 SHALL  NOT  BE  OPEN  TO THE PUBLIC, NOR SUBJECT TO DISCLOSURE UNDER THE
 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION LAW PURSUANT TO ARTICLE SIX OF THE  PUBLIC  OFFI-
 CERS  LAW,  AND  NO  PUBLIC ENTITY OR EMPLOYEE, OFFICER OR AGENT THEREOF
 SHALL DISCLOSE SUCH INFORMATION.
  3. EXCEPTION. NOTHING IN THIS SECTION SHALL PRECLUDE THE DISCLOSURE OF
 CONTACT INFORMATION THAT MAY BE OBTAINED AND, IF  OTHERWISE  ADMISSIBLE,
 BE  USED  IN A CIVIL COURT OR OTHER CIVIL ADMINISTRATIVE OR ADJUDICATORY
 BODY IN ANY ACTION OR PROCEEDING PENDING THEREIN  WHEN  SUCH  ACTION  OR
 PROCEEDING RELATES DIRECTLY TO THE ATTENDANCE OF A SENIOR CENTER.
  4.  VIOLATIONS.  ANY  PERSON  WHO  KNOWINGLY  RELEASES  OR PERMITS THE
 DISCLOSURE OF THE CONTACT INFORMATION THAT IS  CONFIDENTIAL  UNDER  THIS
 SECTION  TO  A PERSON OR ENTITY NOT ENTITLED TO RECEIVE SUCH INFORMATION
 SHALL BE SUBJECT TO A CIVIL PENALTY OF UP TO FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07533-01-3