# Requires hospitals to include testing for fentanyl in urine drug screenings

**Bill ID:** S6085
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Nathalia Fernandez
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S6085 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S6085)

## Summary

Requires that if a person is treated at a hospital and such hospital conducts a urine drug screening to assist in diagnosing the person's condition, the hospital shall include testing for fentanyl in such urine drug screening; defines urine drug screening.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6085
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 28, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. FERNANDEZ -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the public health law, in relation to requiring hospi-
  tals to include testing for fentanyl in urine drug screenings
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  public health law is amended by adding a new section
 2831 to read as follows:
  ยง 2831. URINE DRUG SCREENING. 1. IF A PERSON IS TREATED AT A  HOSPITAL
 AND  SUCH HOSPITAL CONDUCTS A URINE DRUG SCREENING TO ASSIST IN DIAGNOS-
 ING SUCH PERSON'S CONDITION, THE  HOSPITAL  SHALL  INCLUDE  TESTING  FOR
 FENTANYL IN SUCH URINE DRUG SCREENING.
  2.  FOR  THE  PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "URINE DRUG SCREENING" MEANS A
 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS INTENDED TO  TEST  INDIVIDUALS  FOR  THE  PRESENCE  OF
 MULTIPLE DRUGS, INCLUDING COCAINE, OPIOIDS, AND PHENCYCLIDINE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10493-01-3