# Provides that a fire company may elect to include call firefighters within its membership who shall receive a stipend for each call that he or she responds to

**Bill ID:** S6098
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Skoufis
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S6098 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S6098)

## Summary

Provides that a fire company may elect to include call firefighters within its membership who shall receive a stipend for each call that he or she responds to.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6098
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 29, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SKOUFIS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Local Government
 
 AN ACT to amend the general municipal law, in  relation  to  call  fire-
  fighters
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The general municipal  law  is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 201-a to read as follows:
  ยง  201-A.  CALL FIREFIGHTERS.  ANY VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY OF A COUNTY,
 CITY, TOWN, VILLAGE, FIRE DISTRICT,  FIRE  PROTECTION  DISTRICT  OR  ANY
 OTHER  ENTITY  THAT  OPERATES  A  VOLUNTEER  FIRE  COMPANY, MAY ELECT TO
 INCLUDE WITHIN ITS MEMBERSHIP, CALL FIREFIGHTERS. SUCH CALL FIREFIGHTERS
 SHALL SERVE AT THE CALL OF THE FIRE COMPANY, AND SHALL RECEIVE A STIPEND
 EACH TIME SUCH CALL FIREFIGHTER RESPONDS TO A CALL BY SUCH FIRE COMPANY.
 THE AMOUNT OF SUCH STIPEND SHALL BE DETERMINED BY THE FIRE COMPANY,  BUT
 SHALL NOT EXCEED FIFTY DOLLARS PER CALL OR FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS ANNUAL-
 LY  PER CALL FIREFIGHTER.  CALL FIREFIGHTERS SHALL MEET ALL CRITERIA AND
 REQUIREMENTS NECESSARY TO BE A VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER.  CANDIDATES  FOR
 CALL  FIREFIGHTERS  SHALL APPLY TO THE FIRE COMPANY IN A MANNER AND FORM
 TO BE DETERMINED BY SUCH FIRE COMPANY. CALL FIREFIGHTERS  SHALL  IN  ALL
 RESPECTS  BE  AFFORDED THE STATUS AND BENEFITS OF VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS
 AND SHALL BE ELIGIBLE TO PARTICIPATE IN  THE  LENGTH  OF  SERVICE  AWARD
 PROGRAM,  PROVIDED  HOWEVER THAT CALL FIREFIGHTERS SHALL NOT BE ENTITLED
 TO ANY PENSION OR RETIREMENT BENEFITS AFFORDED TO FULL-TIME PROFESSIONAL
 FIREFIGHTERS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07329-01-3