# Relates to joining multistate voter list maintenance organizations

**Bill ID:** S6173BB
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Skoufis
**Status:** Assembly Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S6173BB PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S6173BB)

## Summary

Permits the state board of elections to join certain multistate voter list maintenance organizations and provide such organizations with certain voter information; requires the state to join a multistate voter list maintenance organization on or before July 31, 2025.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6173--B
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 31, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SKOUFIS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the  Committee  on  Elections  --  reported
  favorably  from  said  committee  and  committed  to  the Committee on
  Finance -- committee discharged, bill amended,  ordered  reprinted  as
  amended  and  recommitted  to  said  committee  --  recommitted to the
  Committee on Elections in accordance with Senate Rule  6,  sec.  8  --
  committee  discharged,  bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended and
  recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the election law and the vehicle  and  traffic  law,  in
  relation to joining multistate voter list maintenance organizations
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Legislative findings and intent.  As the official record of
 all eligible voters in a state, a state's voter registration  rolls  are
 the  foundation of free, fair, and accurate elections. Illegal voting is
 exceedingly rare but maintaining accurate voter rolls reduces the oppor-
 tunity for such behavior and  it  helps  build  confidence  in  election
 outcomes.  However,  keeping  voter  rolls  up  to  date  is a challenge
 because, every day, voters move or die. Voters do not always remember to
 update their registration when they move. These challenges are especial-
 ly acute in states with large and  highly  mobile  populations.  Partic-
 ipation  in a multistate voter list maintenance organization can improve
 the accuracy of New York's voter registration rolls. A multistate  voter
 list  maintenance  organization  is a coordinating entity between states
 that aids them in identifying voters who may no longer  be  eligible  to
 vote,  who have moved, or who have died. A voter list maintenance organ-
 ization may also offer  other  information  useful  to  improving  voter
 registration or enhancing the integrity of election administration.
  § 2. Article 5 of the election law is amended by adding a new title 10
 to read as follows:

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10609-10-3
 S. 6173--B  2
 
  TITLE X
  MULTISTATE VOTER LIST MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION MEMBERSHIP AUTHORIZATION
 SECTION 5-1000. JOINING  A  MULTISTATE  VOTER LIST MAINTENANCE ORGANIZA-
  TION.
  5-1001. DESIGNATING A MEMBER REPRESENTATIVE.
  5-1002. AUTHORIZATION TO SHARE REGISTRATION RECORDS WITH  MULTI-
  STATE VOTER LIST MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION.
  5-1003. USE  OF INFORMATION FROM A MULTISTATE VOTER LIST MAINTE-
  NANCE ORGANIZATION.
  § 5-1000. JOINING A MULTISTATE VOTER  LIST  MAINTENANCE  ORGANIZATION.
 THE  STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS SHALL JOIN THE STATE AS A MEMBER IN ONE OR
 MORE MULTISTATE VOTER LIST MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS INCLUDING, BUT  NOT
 LIMITED  TO,  THE  ELECTRONIC  REGISTRATION  INFORMATION  CENTER  OR ITS
 SUCCESSOR. THE STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS SHALL EXPEND FUNDS  FOR  MEMBER-
 SHIP FEES, DUES AND OTHER EXPENSES RELATED TO SUCH MEMBERSHIP.
  §  5-1001.  DESIGNATING  A  MEMBER  REPRESENTATIVE. THE STATE BOARD OF
 ELECTIONS SHALL DESIGNATE THE CHIEF ELECTION OFFICIAL OF  THE  STATE  OF
 NEW  YORK  AS THE REPRESENTATIVE TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF ANY MULTI-
 STATE VOTER LIST MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION THAT THE STATE IS A MEMBER  OF
 INCLUDING,  BUT  NOT LIMITED TO, THE ELECTRONIC REGISTRATION INFORMATION
 CENTER OR ITS SUCCESSOR.
  § 5-1002. AUTHORIZATION TO SHARE REGISTRATION RECORDS WITH  MULTISTATE
 VOTER  LIST  MAINTENANCE  ORGANIZATION.  1.  NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER
 PROVISION OF LAW, THE MEMBER  REPRESENTATIVE  DESIGNATED  UNDER  SECTION
 5-1001  OF  THIS  TITLE MAY PROVIDE TO THE MULTISTATE VOTER LIST MAINTE-
 NANCE ORGANIZATION THAT THEY ARE A MEMBER OF THE  FOLLOWING  INFORMATION
 FROM  THE  STATEWIDE VOTER REGISTRATION LIST AS DEFINED IN SECTION 5-614
 OF THIS ARTICLE:
  (A) ALL NAME FIELDS;
  (B) ALL ADDRESS FIELDS;
  (C) DATE OF BIRTH;
  (D) STATE VOTER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER;
  (E) VOTER'S LAST REGISTRATION DATE;
  (F) ACTIVITY DATES AS DEFINED BY THE MULTISTATE VOTER LIST MAINTENANCE
 ORGANIZATION; AND
  (G) VOTER HISTORY.
  2. THE MEMBER REPRESENTATIVE DESIGNATED UNDER SECTION 5-1001  OF  THIS
 TITLE  MAY  ALSO  PROVIDE  ANY  INFORMATION TO THE MULTISTATE VOTER LIST
 MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION PROVIDED TO SUCH MEMBER REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE
 DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES PURSUANT TO SECTION TWO HUNDRED  NINETEEN-A
 OF THE VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC LAW.
  3.  THE  STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS SHALL NOT PROVIDE ANY INFORMATION ON
 ANY PERSON IN THE CONFIDENTIAL VOTER PROGRAM PURSUANT TO  SECTION  5-508
 OF  THIS ARTICLE FOR ANY PURPOSE UNDER THIS TITLE. NOTHING IN THIS TITLE
 SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO  REQUIRE  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  MOTOR  VEHICLES  TO
 PROVIDE ANY INFORMATION ON ANY PERSON IN SUCH PROGRAM.
  4.  THE  STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS IS AUTHORIZED TO PROMULGATE ANY RULE
 OR REGULATION NECESSARY TO EFFECTUATE THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.
  § 5-1003. USE OF INFORMATION FROM A MULTISTATE VOTER LIST  MAINTENANCE
 ORGANIZATION.  1.  NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISION OF LAW TO THE CONTRARY,
 THE STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS SHALL USE ANY  INFORMATION  PROVIDED  BY  A
 MULTISTATE VOTER LIST MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION THAT THE STATE HAS JOINED
 PURSUANT  TO SECTION 5-1001 OF THIS TITLE, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
 THE USE OF SUCH INFORMATION IN  LIST  MAINTENANCE  ACTIVITIES  PERFORMED
 PURSUANT TO SECTION 5-614 OF THIS ARTICLE.
 S. 6173--B  3
 
  2. TO AVOID INADVERTENT OR ACCIDENTAL REGISTRATION OF PERSONS INELIGI-
 BLE  TO  REGISTER  TO  VOTE, ANY MAILING TO ANY POTENTIALLY ELIGIBLE BUT
 UNREGISTERED PERSON SHALL STATE THE VOTER REGISTRATION CRITERIA, INCLUD-
 ING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY CITIZENSHIP REQUIREMENTS.
  §  3.  The  vehicle and traffic law is amended by adding a new section
 219-a to read as follows:
  § 219-A. STATE MEMBERSHIP  IN  A  MULTISTATE  VOTER  LIST  MAINTENANCE
 ORGANIZATION.  1.  NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY  OTHER  PROVISION  OF LAW TO THE
 CONTRARY, THE COMMISSIONER IS  AUTHORIZED  TO  PROVIDE  TO  THE  STATE'S
 REPRESENTATIVE  TO  A  MULTISTATE  VOTER  LIST MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION,
 DESIGNATED UNDER SECTION 5-1001  OF  THE  ELECTION  LAW,  THE  FOLLOWING
 INFORMATION:  (A)  ALL  NAME  FIELDS; (B) ALL ADDRESS FIELDS; (C) DMV ID
 NUMBER; (D) LAST FOUR DIGITS OF THE  DMV  ID  HOLDER'S  SOCIAL  SECURITY
 NUMBER;  (E) DATE OF BIRTH; (F) CURRENT RECORD STATUS; (G) PHONE NUMBER;
 AND (H) E-MAIL ADDRESS,  PROVIDED  THAT  THE  CONDITIONS  AND  TERMS  OF
 MEMBERSHIP  ARE CONSISTENT WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER AND TITLE
 TEN OF ARTICLE FIVE OF THE ELECTION LAW PERTAINING TO SUCH MEMBERSHIP OR
 RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION OF VEHICLE REGISTRATIONS.
  2. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL NOT PROVIDE ANY INFORMATION PURSUANT TO THIS
 SECTION OF PERSONS WHO ARE NOT CITIZENS.
  § 4. New York state shall join a  multistate  voter  list  maintenance
 organization  promptly  after  the  effective date of this act and shall
 complete its registration  with  a  multistate  voter  list  maintenance
 organization on or before July 31, 2025.
  § 5. This act shall take effect immediately.