# Relates to calculating certain pensions

**Bill ID:** S6174DD
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew Gounardes
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S6174DD PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S6174DD)

## Summary

Relates to calculating certain pensions; increases pension calculation from thirty-five to forty per centum of final average salary.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6174--D
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 31, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sens. GOUNARDES, SANDERS -- read twice and ordered print-
  ed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Civil Service
  and Pensions -- committee discharged, bill amended, ordered  reprinted
  as  amended  and  recommitted  to said committee -- recommitted to the
  Committee on Civil Service and Pensions in accordance with Senate Rule
  6, sec. 8 -- committee discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted  as
  amended  and  recommitted  to  said committee -- committee discharged,
  bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended  and  recommitted  to  said
  committee  -- committee discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as
  amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the retirement and social security law, in  relation  to
  calculating certain pensions
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision a of section 504 of the retirement  and  social
 security  law,  as amended by chapter 18 of the laws of 2012, is amended
 to read as follows:
  a. The service  retirement  benefit  for  general  members  at  normal
 retirement  age with twenty or more years of credited service shall be a
 pension equal to one-fiftieth of final average  salary  times  years  of
 credited  service,  not in excess of thirty years, less fifty percent of
 the primary social security retirement benefit as  provided  in  section
 five  hundred eleven of this article. The service retirement benefit for
 general members at normal retirement age with twenty or  more  years  of
 service who first become members of the New York state and local employ-
 ees'  retirement  system on or after April first, two thousand twelve at
 normal retirement age shall be a pension equal to the  sum  of  [thirty-
 five] FORTY per centum and one-fiftieth of final average salary for each
 year  of service in excess of twenty, but not in excess of thirty, times
 final average salary times years of credited service.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06271-10-4
 S. 6174--D  2
 
  § 2. Subdivisions a, b and b-1 of section 604 of  the  retirement  and
 social  security  law,  subdivision  a as amended and subdivision b-1 as
 added by chapter 18 of the laws of 2012, subdivision  b  as  amended  by
 chapter 266 of the laws of 1998 and the opening paragraph of subdivision
 b  as  amended  by  section  8-b of part B of chapter 504 of the laws of
 2009, are amended to read as follows:
  a. The service retirement benefit  at  normal  retirement  age  for  a
 member  with  less  than twenty years of credited service[, or less than
 twenty-five years credited service for a member who joins the  New  York
 state  teachers'  retirement system on or after January first, two thou-
 sand ten,] shall be a retirement  allowance  equal  to  one-sixtieth  of
 final  average salary times years of credited service. Normal retirement
 age for members who first become members of a public  retirement  system
 of  the  state on or after April first, two thousand twelve shall be age
 sixty-three.
  b. The service retirement benefit  at  normal  retirement  age  for  a
 member  with  twenty years or more of credited service[, or with twenty-
 five or more years credited service for a member who first joins the New
 York state teachers' retirement system on or after  January  first,  two
 thousand  ten,] shall be a retirement allowance equal to one-fiftieth of
 final average salary times years of credited service not  in  excess  of
 thirty years.
  Credited service in excess of thirty years shall provide an additional
 retirement  allowance equal to three-two hundredths of the final average
 salary for each year of credited service in excess of thirty years.
  b-1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the  contrary,  the
 service  retirement  benefit  for  members  with twenty or more years of
 credit service who first become a member of a public  retirement  system
 of  the state on or after April first, two thousand twelve at age sixty-
 three shall be a pension equal to the sum  of  [thirty-five]  FORTY  per
 centum and one-fiftieth of final average salary for each year of service
 in  excess  of twenty times final average salary times years of credited
 service. In no  event  shall  any  retirement  benefit  payable  without
 optional modification be less than the actuarially equivalent annuitized
 value  of  the  member's contributions accumulated with interest at five
 percent per annum compounded annually to the date of retirement.
  § 3. Section 1312 of the retirement and social security law, as  added
 by chapter 18 of the laws of 2012, is amended to read as follows:
  §  1312.  Benefit  enhancements.  Notwithstanding any other law to the
 contrary, eligible employees  shall  be  permitted  to  retire,  without
 penalty,  upon  reaching  age fifty-seven and completing at least thirty
 years of credited service. Employees retiring pursuant to  this  section
 shall  receive  a  pension  allowance  equal to the sum of [thirty-five]
 FORTY per centum and one-fiftieth of final average salary for each  year
 of service in excess of twenty times final average salary times years of
 credited service.
  §  4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, none
 of the provisions of this act shall be subject  to  section  25  of  the
 retirement and social security law.
  § 5. This act shall take effect immediately.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  This  bill  would  change the benefit fraction for a Tier 6 Article 15
 member for service greater than 20 years to 40% of FAS plus 2% per  year
 of  service  greater  than 20. Currently the benefit for service greater
 than 20 years is 35% of FAS plus 2% per year of service greater than 20.
 S. 6174--D  3

  Insofar as this bill affects the New York State and  Local  Employees'
 Retirement  System (NYSLERS), the increased costs would be shared by the
 State of New York and the local participating employers in the  NYSLERS.
 If  this  bill  were  enacted  during  the 2024 Legislative Session, the
 increase  in  the present value of benefits would be approximately $1.74
 billion.
  NYSLERS  Increase in present  Increase in required
  value benefits  contributions
  Tiers 1 - 5  $0  $332 million
  Tier 6  $1.74 billion  $1.41 billion
  Total  $1.74 billion  $1.74 billion
 
  In the NYSLERS, this benefit improvement will be funded by  increasing
 the  billing  rates  charged  annually  to  cover both retrospective and
 prospective benefit increases. The annual contribution required  of  all
 participating  employers  in  NYSLERS  is  0.6%  of  billable salary, or
 approximately $76 million to the State of  New  York  and  approximately
 $110 million to the local participating employers. This PERMANENT ANNUAL
 COST  WILL  INCREASE  as  Tier  6 salary grows and will vary by employer
 based upon the plan coverage and salary reported in Tier 6.
  Summary of relevant resources:
  Membership data as of March 31, 2023 was used in measuring the  impact
 of the proposed change, the same data used in the April 1, 2023 actuari-
 al  valuation.  Distributions  and  other statistics can be found in the
 2023 Report of the Actuary and the 2023 Annual  Comprehensive  Financial
 Report.
  The  actuarial  assumptions and methods used are described in the 2023
 Annual Report to the  Comptroller  on  Actuarial  Assumptions,  and  the
 Codes,  Rules  and  Regulations  of  the  State  of  New York: Audit and
 Control.
  The Market Assets and GASB Disclosures are found in the March 31, 2023
 New York State and Local  Retirement  System  Financial  Statements  and
 Supplementary Information.
  I am a member of the American Academy of Actuaries and meet the Quali-
 fication Standards to render the actuarial opinion contained herein.
  This  fiscal note does not constitute a legal opinion on the viability
 of the proposed change nor is it intended to serve as a  substitute  for
 the professional judgment of an attorney.
  This  estimate,  dated  January  25,  2024,  and intended for use only
 during the  2024  Legislative  Session,  is  Fiscal  Note  No.  2024-43,
 prepared  by  the  Actuary  for  the New York State and Local Retirement
 System.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  This bill would amend Section 604 of the Retirement and Social Securi-
 ty Law to improve the retirement benefit  formula  for  Tiers  5  and  6
 members  of  the  New York State Teachers' Retirement System. The Tier 5
 benefit formula would match the Tier 4 formula with eligibility for  the
 2.0%  multiplier  at  20  years  of service instead of 25 years as it is
 currently.  The retirement benefit formula for Tier 6 members with 20 or
 more years of service would be 40% of final average salary plus  2%  for
 each  year  of  service  in  excess  of 20 years. Currently, the benefit
 formula for Tier 6 members with 20 or more years of service  is  35%  of
 final  average  salary  plus 2% for each year of service in excess of 20
 years.
 S. 6174--D  4

  The annual cost to the employers of members  of  the  New  York  State
 Teachers'  Retirement  System  for this benefit is estimated to be $75.3
 million or 0.39% of payroll if this bill is enacted.
  The  System's "new entrant rate", a hypothetical employer contribution
 rate that would occur if we started a new Retirement System without  any
 assets, is equal to 5.31% of pay under the current Tier 6 benefit struc-
 ture.  This can be thought of as the long-term expected employer cost of
 Tier 6, based on the current actuarial  assumptions.  For  the  proposed
 change to the Tier 6 benefit structure under this bill, this new entrant
 rate  is  estimated to increase to 5.99% of pay, an increase of 0.68% of
 pay.
  Member data is from the System's most recent actuarial valuation files
 as of June 30, 2023, consisting of data provided by the employers to the
 Retirement System. The most recent data distributions and statistics can
 be found in the System's Annual Report for fiscal year  ended  June  30,
 2023. System assets are as reported in the System's financial statements
 and  can  also be found in the System's Annual Report. Actuarial assump-
 tions and methods are  provided  in  the  System's  Actuarial  Valuation
 Report as of June 30, 2023.
  The  source  of  this estimate is Fiscal Note 2024-6 dated February 2,
 2024 prepared by the Office of the Actuary of the New York State  Teach-
 ers'  Retirement  System  and  is  intended for use only during the 2024
 Legislative Session. I, Richard A. Young, am the Chief Actuary  for  the
 New  York State Teachers' Retirement System. I am a member of the Ameri-
 can Academy of Actuaries and I meet the Qualification Standards  of  the
 American  Academy of Actuaries to render the actuarial opinion contained
 herein.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  SUMMARY: This proposed legislation, as it relates to the New York City
 Retirement Systems and Pension Funds (NYCRS) would increase the percent-
 age of Final Average Salary payable to Tier  6  NYCERS,  TRS,  and  BERS
 members who retire with 20 or more years of Credited Service.
 
  EXPECTED INCREASE (DECREASE) IN EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS
  by Fiscal Year for the first 25 years ($ in Millions)
  Year  NYCERS  TRS  BERS  TOTAL
  2025  51.3  62.8  7.3  121.4
  2026  54.7  66.1  7.7  128.5
  2027  58.5  69.8  8.1  136.4
  2028  62.4  73.7  8.6  144.7
  2029  66.5  78.0  9.0  153.5
  2030  70.6  82.5  9.5  162.6
  2031  74.9  87.4  10.0  172.3
  2032  79.1  92.7  10.6  182.4
  2033  83.4  98.3  11.1  192.8
  2034  87.8  104.2  11.7  203.7
  2035  92.2  110.6  12.2  215.0
  2036  96.6  117.2  12.8  226.6
  2037  101.1  124.2  13.4  238.7
  2038  105.5  131.5  11.0  248.0
  2039  109.9  139.2  11.6  260.7
  2040  95.3  147.1  12.2  254.6
  2041  99.7  155.1  12.7  267.5
  2042  104.2  163.2  13.3  280.7
  2043  108.7  171.2  13.9  293.8
  2044  113.2  155.7  14.5  283.4
 S. 6174--D  5
 
  2045  117.8  163.4  15.0  296.2
  2046  122.5  170.8  15.6  308.9
  2047  127.1  178.0  16.2  321.3
  2048  131.9  185.0  16.8  333.7
  2049  136.8  191.8  17.3  345.9
  Employer Contribution impact beyond Fiscal Year 2049 is not shown.
  Projected contributions include future new hires that may be impacted.
 
  The  initial  increase  in employer contributions of $121.4 million is
 estimated to be $94.4 million for New York City and  $27.0  million  for
 the other obligors of NYCRS.
 
  INITIAL INCREASE (DECREASE) IN ACTUARIAL LIABILITIES
  as of June 30, 2023 ($ in Millions)
  Present Value (PV)  NYCERS  TRS  BERS
  PV of Benefits:  551.1  868.1  74.2
  PV of Employee Contributions:  0.0  0.0  0.0
  PV of Employer Contributions:  551.1  868.1  74.2
  Unfunded Accrued Liabilities:  168.2  232.6  23.8
 
  AMORTIZATION OF UNFUNDED ACCRUED LIABILITY
  NYCERS  TRS  BERS
  Number of Payments:  15  19  13
  Fiscal Year of Last Payment:  2039  2043  2037
  Amortization Payment:  19.1 M  23.3 M  2.9 M
  Additional One-time Payment:  0.2 M  0.1 M  0.0 M
 
  Unfunded  Accrued  Liability  (UAL)  increases for active members were
 amortized over the expected remaining working lifetime of those impacted
 by the benefit changes using level dollar payments. UAL attributable  to
 terminated vested members was recognized in the first year.
  CENSUS  DATA:  The estimates presented herein are based on preliminary
 census data collected as of June 30,  2023.  The  census  data  for  the
 impacted population is summarized below.
 
  NYCERS  TRS  BERS
  Active Members
  - Number Count:  85,203  60,663  12,932
  - Average Age:  42.4  38.1  46.9
  - Average Service:  4.4  5.0  4.0
  - Average Salary:  78,900  80,000  56,200
  Term. Vested Members
  - Number Count:  3,665  3,999  397
  - Average Age:  42.0  37.9  44.6
 
  IMPACT  ON  MEMBER BENEFITS: Currently, the service retirement benefit
 for Tier 6 basic plan members of NYCERS, TRS, and BERS who  have  20  or
 more  years  of Credited Service is equal to 35% of Final Average Salary
 (FAS) plus 2% of FAS for each year of Credited Service in excess of 20.
  Under the proposed legislation, the  service  retirement  benefit  for
 Tier  6  basic plan members of NYCERS, TRS, and BERS who have 20 or more
 years of Credited Service would be equal to 40% of FAS plus  2%  of  FAS
 for each year of Credited Service in excess of 20.
  ASSUMPTIONS  AND  METHODS:  The  estimates  presented herein have been
 calculated based on the Revised 2021 Actuarial Assumptions  and  Methods
 of the impacted retirement systems. In addition:
 S. 6174--D  6
 
  *  New  entrants were assumed to replace exiting members so that total
 payroll increases by 3% each year for impacted groups. New entrant demo-
 graphics were developed based on data for recent new hires and actuarial
 judgement.
  RISK  AND  UNCERTAINTY: The costs presented in this Fiscal Note depend
 highly on the actuarial assumptions, methods,  and  models  used,  demo-
 graphics  of  the impacted population, and other factors such as invest-
 ment, contribution, and other risks. If actual experience deviates  from
 actuarial  assumptions,  the  actual  costs  could  differ  from  those
 presented herein. Quantifying these risks is beyond the  scope  of  this
 Fiscal Note.
  This  Fiscal  Note  is intended to measure pension-related impacts and
 does not include other potential costs (e.g., administrative  and  Other
 Postemployment Benefits).
  STATEMENT OF ACTUARIAL OPINION: Marek Tyszkiewicz and Gregory Zelikov-
 sky  are members of the Society of Actuaries and the American Academy of
 Actuaries. We are members of NYCERS but do not believe  it  impairs  our
 objectivity  and  we  meet  the  Qualification Standards of the American
 Academy of Actuaries to render the actuarial opinion  contained  herein.
 To  the  best  of  our knowledge, the results contained herein have been
 prepared in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles  and
 procedures  and  with  the Actuarial Standards of Practice issued by the
 Actuarial Standards Board.
  FISCAL NOTE IDENTIFICATION: This Fiscal Note 2024-34 dated  March  22,
 2024  was prepared by the Chief Actuary for the New York City Retirement
 Systems and Pension Funds. This estimate is intended for use only during
 the 2024 Legislative Session.