# Designates September 11th as a public holiday

**Bill ID:** S6203
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jessica Scarcella-Spanton
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S6203 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S6203)

## Summary

Designates September 11th as a public holiday to be known as September 11th Memorial and Remembrance Day.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6203
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 3, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. SCARCELLA-SPANTON -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the general construction law, in relation to designating
  September eleventh as a public holiday
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section 24 of the general construction law, as amended by
 chapter 249 of the laws of 2020, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 24. Public holidays; half-holidays. The term public holiday includes
 the following days in each year: the first day of January, known as  New
 Year's  day;  the  third  Monday  of January, known as Dr. Martin Luther
 King, Jr. day; the twelfth day of February, known as Lincoln's birthday;
 the third Monday in February, known as Washington's birthday;  the  last
 Monday  in  May, known as Memorial day; the second Sunday in June, known
 as Flag day; the nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth; the fourth
 day of July, known as Independence day; the first Monday  in  September,
 known  as  Labor  day; THE ELEVENTH DAY OF SEPTEMBER, KNOWN AS SEPTEMBER
 11TH MEMORIAL AND REMEMBRANCE DAY; the second Monday in  October,  known
 as  Columbus  day; the eleventh day of November, known as Veterans' day;
 the fourth Thursday in November, known  as  Thanksgiving  day;  and  the
 twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas day, and if any of such
 days  except  Flag  day is Sunday, the next day thereafter; each general
 election day, and each day appointed by  the  president  of  the  United
 States  or  by the governor of this state as a day of general thanksgiv-
 ing, general fasting and prayer, or other general religious observances.
 The term half-holiday includes the period from noon to midnight of  each
 Saturday which is not a public holiday.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10637-01-3