# Relates to requiring lodging facilities to set air conditioner default settings to certain temperatures

**Bill ID:** S6222
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Rachel May
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S6222 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S6222)

## Summary

Relates to requiring lodging facilities to set air conditioner default settings to certain temperatures; requires such facilities to not set the default temperature settings lower than 75 degrees Fahrenheit between the months of May through October and higher than 64 degrees Fahrenheit between the months of November through April.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6222
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  MAY  --  read  twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Consumer Protection
 
 AN ACT to amend the general business law, in relation to requiring lodg-
  ing facilities to set air  conditioner  default  settings  to  certain
  temperatures

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The general business law is amended by adding a new section
 206-g to read as follows:
  ยง 206-G. AIR CONDITIONER DEFAULT SETTINGS. 1.  FOR  PURPOSES  OF  THIS
 SECTION,  "LODGING  FACILITY"  SHALL  MEAN  ANY INN, HOTEL, MOTEL, MOTOR
 COURT OR OTHER ESTABLISHMENT THAT PROVIDES LODGING TO TRANSIENT  GUESTS.
 SUCH  TERM SHALL NOT INCLUDE AN ESTABLISHMENT TREATED AS A DWELLING UNIT
 FOR THE PURPOSES OF ANY STATE OR LOCAL LAW OR REGULATION  OR  AN  ESTAB-
 LISHMENT  LOCATED WITHIN A BUILDING THAT HAS FIVE OR LESS ROOMS FOR RENT
 OR HIRE AND THAT IS ACTUALLY OCCUPIED AS A RESIDENCE BY  THE  PROPRIETOR
 OF SUCH ESTABLISHMENT.
  2.  A  KEEPER  OF A LODGING FACILITY SHALL NOT SET THE DEFAULT TEMPER-
 ATURE SETTING ON ANY AIR CONDITIONER LOCATED IN ANY ROOM OR COMMON  AREA
 (A) LOWER THAN SEVENTY-FIVE DEGREES FAHRENHEIT BETWEEN THE MONTHS OF MAY
 THROUGH  OCTOBER  AND  (B)  HIGHER  THAN  SIXTY-FOUR  DEGREES FAHRENHEIT
 BETWEEN THE MONTHS OF NOVEMBER THROUGH APRIL.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02094-01-3