# Defines the term mass shooting for purposes of emergency response measures and access to emergency funding

**Bill ID:** S6238AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Zellnor Myrie
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S6238AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S6238AA)

## Summary

Defines the term "mass shooting" for purposes of access to emergency funding as a shooting incident involving one or more firearms, rifles or shotguns during which four or more people, other than the individual or individuals alleged to have committed such incident, were injured or killed.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6238--A
  Cal. No. 870
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 5, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sens. MYRIE, BROUK, CLEARE, MAY, SALAZAR -- read twice and
  ordered  printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee on
  Codes -- reported favorably from said committee, ordered to first  and
  second report, ordered to a third reading, passed by Senate and deliv-
  ered  to  the Assembly, recalled, vote reconsidered, restored to third
  reading, amended and ordered reprinted, retaining  its  place  in  the
  order of third reading
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  executive law, in relation to defining the term
  "mass shooting" for purposes of emergency response measures and access
  to emergency funding
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section 835 of the executive law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 11 to read as follows:
  11. "MASS SHOOTING" MEANS, FOR THE PURPOSES OF ANY FUNDING RECEIVED OR
 EXPENDED PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE, A SHOOTING INCIDENT INVOLVING ONE  OR
 MORE  FIREARMS,  RIFLES  OR  SHOTGUNS  DURING WHICH FOUR OR MORE PEOPLE,
 OTHER THAN THE INDIVIDUAL OR INDIVIDUALS ALLEGED TO HAVE COMMITTED  SUCH
 INCIDENT, WERE INJURED OR KILLED.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10287-04-3