# Authorizes the use of benthic barriers to control invasive aquatic plants around docks

**Bill ID:** S6230
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pamela Helming
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S6230 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S6230)

## Summary

Authorizes the use of benthic barriers, between July 1 and October 31, to control invasive aquatic plants around docks.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6230
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 5, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. HELMING -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN ACT to amend the  environmental  conservation  law,  in  relation  to
  control of aquatic vegetation by means of a benthic barrier
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The environmental conservation law is amended by  adding  a
 new section 9-1712 to read as follows:
 ยง 9-1712. CONTROL OF AQUATIC VEGETATION BY MEANS OF A BENTHIC BARRIER.
  1.  FOR  THE  PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "BENTHIC BARRIER" SHALL MEAN A
 FILM OF NATURAL OR SYNTHETIC MATTER WHICH IS GAS PERMEABLE AND  ANCHORED
 BY  MEANS OTHER THAN STONE FROM THE LAKE BOTTOM, FOR THE SOLE PURPOSE OF
 CONTROLLING OR SUPPRESSING AQUATIC VEGETATION AROUND  RESIDENTIAL  DOCKS
 OR SWIMMING AREAS.
  2. NO PERSON SHALL BE PROHIBITED FROM PLACING TEMPORARY BENTHIC BARRI-
 ERS IN ANY FRESHWATER BODY OF WATER LOCATED IN FRONT OF HIS OR HER PROP-
 ERTY'S  SHORELINE BETWEEN JULY FIRST AND OCTOBER THIRTY-FIRST EACH YEAR,
 FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONTROLLING INVASIVE AQUATIC PLANTS AROUND, NEAR  AND
 BETWEEN DOCKS.
  3.  THE  PLACEMENT  OF  THESE  TEMPORARY BENTHIC BARRIERS SHALL NOT BE
 CONSIDERED "FILL", AND THEREFORE ARE NOT SUBJECT TO  THE  PROVISIONS  OF
 TITLE  FIVE  OF  ARTICLE  FIFTEEN  OF  THIS  CHAPTER  OR  GENERAL PERMIT
 GP-0-17-001.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00112-01-3