# Repeals certain provisions establishing a fee for background checks on certain firearm and ammunition purchases and amends the source of funds for the background check fund accordingly

**Bill ID:** S7645
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Mark Walczyk
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7645 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7645)

## Summary

Repeals certain provisions establishing a fee for background checks on certain firearm and ammunition purchases; removes such fees as a source of funds for the background check fund.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7645
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  August 30, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. WALCZYK -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to repeal certain provisions of the executive law establishing  a
  fee for background checks on certain firearm and ammunition purchases;
  and to amend the state finance law, in relation to the source of funds
  for the background check fund
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 5 of  section  228  of  the  executive  law  is
 REPEALED.
  ยง  2.  Subdivisions 2 and 5 of section 99-pp of the state finance law,
 as added by chapter 371 of the laws of 2022,  are  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  2.  Such  fund  shall  consist  of  all revenues received by the comp-
 troller, [pursuant to the provisions of section two hundred twenty-eight
 of the executive law and all other] CONSISTING  OF  moneys  appropriated
 thereto from any other fund or source pursuant to law. Nothing contained
 in  this section shall prevent the state from receiving grants, gifts or
 bequests for the purposes of the fund as defined  in  this  section  and
 depositing them into the fund according to law.
  5. [(a)] Any unexpended and unencumbered moneys remaining in the back-
 ground  check fund at the end of a fiscal year shall remain in the back-
 ground check fund and shall not be credited to any other fund.
  [(b) To the extent practicable, any such remaining funds shall be used
 to reduce the amount of the fee described in subdivision two of  section
 two hundred twenty-eight of the executive law.]
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13159-01-3