# Relates to the installation of solar canopies in certain parking facilities

**Bill ID:** S7656A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Rachel May
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7656A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7656A)

## Summary

Permits and encourages state owned parking facilities to install solar canopies in any parking garage, open parking lot or other parking facility owned and/or operated by the state of New York, that offers parking spaces for the purposes of public use, state employee use or pay-per-usage constructed prior to January first, two thousand twenty-eight; requires such installation after January 1, 2028.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7656
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  September 18, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  MAY  --  read  twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law, in relation to permitting state owned
  parking facilitates to install solar canopies
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The executive law is amended by adding a new section 201-b
 to read as follows:
  ยง 201-B. PARKING FACILITIES; SOLAR CANOPIES. 1.  ANY  PARKING  GARAGE,
 OPEN PARKING LOT AND OTHER PARKING FACILITY OWNED AND/OR OPERATED BY THE
 STATE OF NEW YORK, THAT OFFERS PARKING SPACES FOR THE PURPOSES OF PUBLIC
 USE, STATE EMPLOYEE USE OR PAY-PER-USAGE, IS HEREBY PERMITTED TO INSTALL
 SOLAR CANOPIES IN SUCH FACILITIES.
  2.  FOR  THE  PURPOSES  OF  THIS  SECTION, "SOLAR CANOPY" SHALL MEAN A
 SYSTEM DESIGNED TO CAPTURE SOLAR RADIATION FOR THE PURPOSE OF  PRODUCING
 USABLE ENERGY.
  3. THE OFFICE OF GENERAL SERVICES SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE INSTAL-
 LATION  OF  ANY SOLAR CANOPIES OR ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT. IF THE OFFICE OF
 GENERAL SERVICES IS UNABLE TO INSTALL  SUCH  EQUIPMENT,  THE  STATE  MAY
 CONTRACT  WITH  A LICENSED ELECTRICIAN OR SIMILAR SERVICE PROVIDER. SUCH
 CONTRACTED WORK SHALL COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS OF ARTICLE EIGHT OF THE
 LABOR LAW, INCLUDING THE PAYMENT OF A WAGE OF NOT LESS THAN THE PREVAIL-
 ING WAGE IN THE LOCALITY WHERE SUCH ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION IS
 LOCATED.
  4. THE OFFICE OF GENERAL SERVICES SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE MAINTE-
 NANCE, GENERAL UPKEEP, AND REPAIR OF  ANY  SOLAR  CANOPY  OR  ASSOCIATED
 EQUIPMENT.  IF THE OFFICE OF GENERAL SERVICES IS UNABLE TO COMPLETE SUCH
 MAINTENANCE OR REPAIRS, THE STATE MAY CONTRACT WITH A LICENSED  ELECTRI-
 CIAN  OR  SIMILAR  REPAIR SERVICE TO COMPLETE THE NECESSARY WORK ON SAID
 EQUIPMENT.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10168-01-3