# Establishes contract requirements for contracts involving the creation and use of digital replicas

**Bill ID:** S7676BA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jessica Ramos
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S7676BA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7676BA)

## Summary

Establishes contract requirements for contracts involving the creation and use of digital replicas.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7676--A
  Cal. No. 945
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  October 2, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  RAMOS  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules  --  recommitted  to
  the Committee on Judiciary in accordance with Senate Rule 6, sec. 8 --
  reported  favorably  from  said committee, ordered to first and second
  report, ordered to a third reading,  amended  and  ordered  reprinted,
  retaining its place in the order of third reading
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the general obligations law, in relation to contracts
  for the creation and use of digital replicas
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  general  obligations  law is amended by adding a new
 section 5-302 to read as follows:
  ยง 5-302. CONTRACTS FOR THE CREATION AND USE OF DIGITAL  REPLICAS.  ANY
 PROVISION  IN AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN AN INDIVIDUAL AND ANY OTHER PERSON OR
 ENTITY FOR THE PERFORMANCE  OF  PERSONAL  OR  PROFESSIONAL  SERVICES  IS
 CONTRARY  TO  PUBLIC  POLICY  AND  SHALL BE VOID AND UNENFORCEABLE AS IT
 RELATES TO A NEW PERFORMANCE BY DIGITAL  REPLICATION  IF  THE  PROVISION
 MEETS ALL OF THE FOLLOWING CONDITIONS:
  1.  THE PROVISION ALLOWS FOR THE CREATION AND USE OF A DIGITAL REPLICA
 OF THE INDIVIDUAL'S VOICE OR LIKENESS IN PLACE OF  WORK  THE  INDIVIDUAL
 WOULD OTHERWISE HAVE PERFORMED IN PERSON.
  2. THE PROVISION DOES NOT INCLUDE A REASONABLY SPECIFIC DESCRIPTION OF
 THE INTENT OF THE DIGITAL REPLICA.
  3. THE INDIVIDUAL WAS NOT:
  (A) REPRESENTED BY LEGAL COUNSEL WHO NEGOTIATED ON BEHALF OF THE INDI-
 VIDUAL LICENSING THE INDIVIDUAL'S DIGITAL REPLICA RIGHTS AND THE LICENS-
 ING  TERMS  ARE  NOT  STATED  CLEARLY AND CONSPICUOUSLY IN AN EMPLOYMENT
 CONTRACT THAT IS SEPARATELY SIGNED OR INITIALED BY THE INDIVIDUAL OR  IN
 A SEPARATE WRITING THAT IS SIGNED BY THE INDIVIDUAL; OR
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13334-02-4
 S. 7676--A  2
 
  (B)  REPRESENTED  BY  A LABOR ORGANIZATION REPRESENTING WORKERS WHO DO
 THE PROPOSED WORK AND THE TERMS OF THEIR COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
 EXPRESSLY COVER USES OF DIGITAL REPLICAS.
  ยง  2.  This  act  shall take effect January 1, 2025 and shall apply to
 contracts entered into or modified on or after such effective date.