# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Sgt Terry James Garigen Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** S7679AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** George Borrello
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S7679AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7679AA)

## Summary

Designates a portion of state route 77 between Broadway Road and Sumner Road in the town of Darien, county of Genesee, as the "Sgt Terry James Garigen Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7679--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  October 2, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. BORRELLO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules  --  recommitted  to
  the Committee on Transportation in accordance with Senate Rule 6, sec.
  8  -- committee discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended
  and recommitted to said committee

 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the  "Sgt  Terry  James  Garigen  Memorial
  Highway"
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-p to
 read as follows:
  ยง 344-P. PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED  AS  THE
 "SGT  TERRY  JAMES  GARIGEN  MEMORIAL  HIGHWAY". ALL THAT PORTION OF THE
 STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM CONSTITUTING STATE ROUTE 77 BETWEEN  BROADWAY  ROAD
 AND  SUMNER  ROAD  IN  THE  TOWN  OF DARIEN, COUNTY OF GENESEE, SHALL BE
 DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS THE "SGT TERRY JAMES GARIGEN MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".
  ยง 2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the  instal-
 lation  and  maintenance of adequate signing of the state highway system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this  act.  However,  to  avoid
 confusion  and  to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the desig-
 nation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall  be  one  of
 ceremonial  nature  and  the  official name of such highway shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13296-03-4