# Relates to the powers and duties of the commission on forensic science regarding familial DNA search regulations

**Bill ID:** S7734
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Luis R. Sepúlveda
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7734 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7734)

## Summary

Prohibits the use of the state DNA identification index for familial DNA searches.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7734
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  November 1, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. SEPULVEDA -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN  ACT to amend the executive law, in relation to the powers and duties
  of the commission on forensic science regarding  familial  DNA  search
  regulations

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The opening paragraph of subdivision 9 and  subdivision  12
 of  section  995-b  of the executive law, as added by chapter 737 of the
 laws of 1994, are amended to read as follows:
  After reviewing recommendations from the division of criminal  justice
 services,  the  commission,  in  consultation with the DNA subcommittee,
 shall promulgate a policy for the establishment and operation of  a  DNA
 identification  index  consistent  with the operational requirements and
 capabilities of the division of criminal justice  services,  SUBJECT  TO
 THE  RESTRICTIONS  SET FORTH IN SUBDIVISION TWELVE OF THIS SECTION. Such
 policy shall address the following issues:
  12. Promulgate standards for a determination of a  match  between  the
 DNA  records  contained  in the state DNA identification index and a DNA
 record of a person submitted for comparison therewith; PROVIDED,  HOWEV-
 ER, THAT SUCH STANDARDS SHALL PROHIBIT A FAMILIAL DNA SEARCH.
  §  2.  Section  995-c  of the executive law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 10 to read as follows:
  10. NO SEARCH MAY BE PERFORMED OF THE STATE DNA  IDENTIFICATION  INDEX
 FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF IDENTIFICATION OF AN OFFENDER IN CONNECTION WITH A
 CRIME FOR WHICH THE OFFENDER MAY BE A BIOLOGICAL RELATIVE OF  THE  INDI-
 VIDUAL FROM WHOM THE DNA SAMPLE WAS ACQUIRED.
  §  3.  This act shall take effect immediately. Any rules, regulations,
 policies or procedures which are in conflict with the amendments made by
 this act are immediately nullified and void as against public policy.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13535-01-3