# Relates to requiring utility corporations to remove debris attributable to servicing or protection of delivery lines or systems

**Bill ID:** S7741
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Rolison
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7741 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7741)

## Summary

Requires a utility corporation that trims, prunes or cuts trees, bushes or other vegetation on private property in connection with the servicing or protection of the supply or delivery lines or systems of the utility to arrange for the complete removal from the private property of the debris that results from such actions.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7741
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  November 13, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ROLISON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the public service law, in relation to requiring utility
  corporations to remove debris attributable to servicing or  protection
  of delivery lines or systems

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The public service law is amended by adding a  new  section
 119-e to read as follows:
  ยง  119-E.  REMOVAL OF TIMBER. A UTILITY CORPORATION THAT TRIMS, PRUNES
 OR CUTS TREES,  BUSHES  OR  OTHER  VEGETATION  ON  PRIVATE  PROPERTY  IN
 CONNECTION  WITH  THE  SERVICING OR PROTECTION OF THE SUPPLY OR DELIVERY
 LINES OR SYSTEMS OF THE UTILITY SHALL ARRANGE FOR THE  COMPLETE  REMOVAL
 FROM  THE PRIVATE PROPERTY OF THE DEBRIS THAT RESULTS FROM SUCH ACTIONS.
 SUCH REMOVAL SHALL INCLUDE WOODCHIP  PROCESSING  AND/OR  HAULING  DOWNED
 TREES  OR  BRANCHES  TO  BE  COMPOSTED,  RECYCLED OR SOLD AS TREE LENGTH
 LUMBER. THE COST OF SUCH REMOVAL SHALL BE BORNE BY  THE  UTILITY  CORPO-
 RATION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13040-02-3