# Designates certain portions of the state highway system as the "Between Cayuga and Seneca Lakes Wine Trail"

**Bill ID:** S7757A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Thomas F. O'Mara
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7757A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7757A)

## Summary

Designates certain portions of the state highway system between Cayuga lake and Seneca lake as the "Between Cayuga and Seneca Lakes Wine Trail".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7757
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  November 15, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  O'MARA -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law,  in  relation  to  designating  certain
  portions of the state highway system as the "Between Cayuga and Seneca
  Lakes Wine Trail"

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The section heading of section 343-k of the highway law, as
 amended by chapter 227 of the laws of 2017, is amended and a new  subdi-
 vision 3-a is added to read as follows:
  Portions  of  the  state  highway system to be designated as the "Lake
 Erie Wine Country Trail", the "Canandaigua Wine Trail", the "Cayuga Wine
 Trail East", the "Cayuga Wine Trail West", THE "BETWEEN CAYUGA AND SENE-
 CA LAKES WINE TRAIL", the "Seneca Lake Wine  Trail  East",  the  "Seneca
 Lake Wine Trail West", the "Keuka Lake Wine Trail", the "Shawangunk Wine
 Trail",  the  "Dutchess  Wine  Trail",  the "North Fork Wine Trail", the
 "Hamptons Wine Trail", the "Long Island Wine Region", the "Niagara  Wine
 Trail  Ridge",  the  "Niagara  Wine  Trail Lake", the "Lake Ontario Wine
 Trail", the "Adirondack Coast Wine Trail", the "St. Lawrence Wine Trail"
 and the "Upper Hudson Wine Trail".
  3-A. ALL THAT PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM  CONSTITUTING  STATE
 ROUTE  96  FROM  ITS  INTERSECTION  WITH STATE ROUTE 13 IN ITHACA TO THE
 INTERSECTION OF STATE ROUTES 96, 414 AND 96A IN OVID, AND THEN  CONTINU-
 ING  ON  STATE ROUTE 96A TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH STATE ROUTES 5 & 20 IN
 GENEVA, AND THEN CONTINUING ON STATE ROUTES 5 & 20 TO THEIR INTERSECTION
 WITH STATE ROUTE 14. ALSO, ALL THAT PORTION OF THE INTERSECTION OF STATE
 ROUTE 96A AND STATE ROUTE 336 GOING EAST TO THE  INTERSECTION  OF  STATE
 ROUTE  336  AND  STATE  ROUTE  414 IN FAYETTE. ALSO, ALL THAT PORTION OF
 STATE ROUTE 96 FROM ITS INTERSECTION WITH STATE ROUTE 414 SOUTH OF ROMU-
 LUS, CONTINUING NORTH THROUGH WATERLOO AND WEST TO THE  INTERSECTION  OF
 STATE  ROUTES  96  AND 14 JUST SOUTH OF INTERSTATE ROUTE I-90. ALSO, ALL
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11976-01-3
 S. 7757  2
 
 THAT PORTION OF COUNTY ROUTE 227 FROM ITS INTERSECTION WITH STATE  ROUTE
 96  IN  TRUMANSBURG SOUTH TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH STATE ROUTE 79. ALSO,
 ALL THAT PORTION OF STATE ROUTE 79  FROM  ITS  INTERSECTION  WITH  STATE
 ROUTE  13  IN  ITHACA TO ITS INTERSECTION WITH STATE ROUTE 14 IN WATKINS
 GLEN. SUCH PORTIONS OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM SHALL BE DESIGNATED  AND
 KNOWN AS THE "BETWEEN CAYUGA AND SENECA LAKES WINE TRAIL".
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.