# Adds xylazine to the depressants designated as controlled substances

**Bill ID:** S7763B
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Dean Murray
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7763B PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7763B)

## Summary

Adds xylazine to the depressants designated as controlled substances with the exception of use in cattle or other nonhuman species if approved by the federal food and drug administration.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7763
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  November 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  MURRAY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to adding xylazine to
  the depressants designated as controlled substances
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Subdivision 1 of section 3305 of the public health law is
 amended by adding a new paragraph (e) to read as follows:
  (E) TO ANY INDIVIDUAL WHO POSSESSES, SELLS,  ADMINISTERS,  PRESCRIBES,
 OR  DISTRIBUTES ANY SUBSTANCE CONTAINING XYLAZINE EXPRESSLY INTENDED FOR
 ADMINISTRATION THROUGH INJECTIONS TO CATTLE OR  OTHER  NONHUMAN  SPECIES
 AND THAT ARE APPROVED BY THE FEDERAL FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION SOLELY
 FOR SUCH USE.
  ยง  2.  Subdivision  (e)  of  schedule  I of section 3306 of the public
 health law is amended by adding a new paragraph 7 to read as follows:
  (7) XYLAZINE (N- (3, 6-DIMETHYLPHENYL) - 5, 6-DIHYDRO-4H-1,3  THIAZIN-
 2-A-MINE).  THIS  SUBDIVISION SHALL NOT INCLUDE ANY SUBSTANCE CONTAINING
 XYLAZINE EXPRESSLY INTENDED FOR  ADMINISTRATION  THROUGH  INJECTIONS  TO
 CATTLE  OR  OTHER  NONHUMAN SPECIES AND THAT ARE APPROVED BY THE FEDERAL
 FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION SOLELY FOR SUCH  USE.  ANY  INDIVIDUAL  WHO
 KNOWINGLY  AND  WILLFULLY  ADMINISTERS  TO  THEMSELF  OR ANOTHER PERSON,
 PRESCRIBES, DISPENSES OR  DISTRIBUTES  SUCH  SUBSTANCES  WHEN  ANY  SUCH
 SUBSTANCE  IS  INTENDED  FOR  HUMAN CONSUMPTION OR FOR ANY PURPOSE OTHER
 THAN INJECTION TO CATTLE OR NONHUMAN SPECIES SHALL  BE  SUBJECT  TO  THE
 SAME  PENALTIES  AS  ANY  INDIVIDUAL  OR  PRACTITIONER  WHO VIOLATES THE
 PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION, SECTION 3304 OF THIS  TITLE,  OR  ANY  OTHER
 PENALTIES PRESCRIBED BY LAW.
  ยง  3.  This  act shall take effect on the thirtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13520-02-3