# Relates to barring a person convicted of a hate crime from attending any state public school of higher education

**Bill ID:** S7761
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Tedisco
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7761 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7761)

## Summary

Bars a person who is convicted of a hate crime from attending any SUNY or CUNY institution; provides for the expulsion of a student who is convicted of hate crimes; provides for reinstatement of such student if the conviction is subsequently overturned.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7761
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  November 17, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sens. TEDISCO, GRIFFO, OBERACKER, RHOADS -- read twice and
  ordered  printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee on
  Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law,  in  relation  to  barring  a  person
  convicted  of  a  hate crime from attending any state public school of
  higher education

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 6436-a
 to read as follows:
  ยง  6436-A.  HATE  CRIME  CONVICTION.  ANY PERSON WHO IS CONVICTED OF A
 CRIME UNDER SECTION 485.05 OF THE PENAL LAW (HATE CRIMES) BY A COURT  OF
 COMPETENT  JURISDICTION  SHALL  BE  BARRED FROM ATTENDING ANY COLLEGE OR
 UNIVERSITY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE  OF  NEW  YORK  AND  THE  CITY
 UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK, INCLUDING EACH SENIOR COLLEGE AND EACH COMMUNITY
 COLLEGE.  A  PERSON  WHO  IS  A  CURRENT  STUDENT  AT  THE  TIME OF SUCH
 CONVICTION SHALL BE EXPELLED FROM THE INSTITUTION HE OR SHE IS ATTENDING
 IMMEDIATELY UPON CONVICTION. IF THE  CONVICTION  IS  SUBSEQUENTLY  OVER-
 TURNED  UPON  APPEAL, SUCH PERSON SHALL BE REINSTATED TO THE INSTITUTION
 HE OR SHE WAS EXPELLED FROM IN THE STANDING HE OR SHE HAD PRIOR  TO  THE
 CONVICTION.
  ยง  2. This act shall take effect immediately and shall apply to school
 years commencing on and after July 1, 2024.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13586-01-3