# Prohibits the sale of disposable electronic cigarettes

**Bill ID:** S7771
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Nathalia Fernandez
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7771 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7771)

## Summary

Prohibits the sale of disposable electronic cigarettes.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7771
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  November 27, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. FERNANDEZ -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the public health law, in relation to prohibiting the
  sale of disposable electronic cigarettes
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  public health law is amended by adding a new section
 1399-dd-2 to read as follows:
  ยง 1399-DD-2. SALE OF DISPOSABLE ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES  PROHIBITED.  1.
 FOR  THE  PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "DISPOSABLE ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE" OR
 "DISPOSABLE E-CIGARETTE" MEANS ANY ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR  E-CIGARETTE,
 AS  DEFINED  IN SUBDIVISION THIRTEEN OF SECTION THIRTEEN HUNDRED NINETY-
 NINE-AA OF THIS ARTICLE, THAT CANNOT BE REFILLED WITH VAPOR PRODUCTS.
  2. NO PERSON, FIRM, PARTNERSHIP, COMPANY, CORPORATION OR DEALER  SHALL
 SELL  OR OFFER FOR SALE AT RETAIL IN THE STATE ANY DISPOSABLE ELECTRONIC
 CIGARETTE PRODUCT.
  3. ANY PERSON, FIRM, PARTNERSHIP, COMPANY, CORPORATION OR  DEALER,  OR
 ANY  AGENT  OR  EMPLOYEE OF A PERSON, FIRM, PARTNERSHIP, COMPANY, CORPO-
 RATION OR DEALER, WHO VIOLATES THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION  SHALL  BE
 SUBJECT TO A CIVIL PENALTY OF NOT MORE THAN ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR EACH
 INDIVIDUAL  PACKAGE  OF  DISPOSABLE ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE PRODUCT SOLD OR
 OFFERED FOR SALE, PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT WITH RESPECT TO A  MANUFACTUR-
 ER,  IT SHALL BE AN AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE TO A FINDING OF VIOLATION PURSU-
 ANT TO THIS SECTION THAT SUCH SALE OR  OFFER  OF  SALE,  AS  APPLICABLE,
 OCCURRED  WITHOUT THE KNOWLEDGE, CONSENT, AUTHORIZATION, OR INVOLVEMENT,
 DIRECT OR INDIRECT, OF SUCH MANUFACTURER.  VIOLATIONS  OF  THIS  SECTION
 SHALL BE ENFORCED PURSUANT TO SECTION THIRTEEN HUNDRED NINETY-NINE-FF OF
 THIS  ARTICLE,  EXCEPT  THAT  ANY  PERSON  MAY  SUBMIT A COMPLAINT TO AN
 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER THAT A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION HAS OCCURRED.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11879-02-3