# Requires proof of service to include the server's perception of certain characteristics of the person to whom personal service of a summons was delivered

**Bill ID:** S7801AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John Liu
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S7801AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7801AA)

## Summary

Enacts the stop civil discrimination act requiring proof of service to include the server's perception of certain characteristics of the person to whom personal service of a summons was delivered.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7801--A
  Cal. No. 946
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  December 11, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  LIU  --  read  twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules  --  recommitted  to
  the Committee on Judiciary in accordance with Senate Rule 6, sec. 8 --
  reported  favorably  from  said committee, ordered to first and second
  report, ordered to a third reading,  amended  and  ordered  reprinted,
  retaining its place in the order of third reading
 
 AN ACT to amend the civil practice law and rules, in relation to requir-
  ing  proof  of  service  to include the server's perception of various
  characteristics of the recipient in the description of the  person  to
  whom personal service of a summons was delivered
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  Short title. This act shall be known and may be  cited  as
 the "stop civil discrimination act".
  ยง 2.  Subdivision (b) of rule 306 of the civil practice law and rules,
 as  amended  by  chapter  103 of the laws of 1977, is amended to read as
 follows:
  (b) Personal service. Whenever service is made pursuant to this  arti-
 cle  by delivery of the summons to an individual, proof of service shall
 also include, in addition to any other requirement, a description of the
 person to whom it was so delivered, including, but not limited to, [sex,
 color of skin] THE PROCESS SERVER'S PERCEPTION OF THE PERSON'S:  GENDER,
 RACE,  hair  color,  approximate age, approximate weight and height, and
 other identifying features.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13038-05-4