# Establishes a tax deduction for expenses related to early intervention supplies

**Bill ID:** S7817
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John Mannion
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7817 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7817)

## Summary

Establishes a tax deduction for expenses not in excess of five hundred dollars paid by eligible qualified personnel or an eligible service coordinator for early intervention supplies.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7817
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  December 18, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. MANNION -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the tax law, in relation to establishing a tax deduction
  for expenses related to early intervention supplies
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Subsection (c) of section 612 of the tax law is amended by
 adding a new paragraph 47 to read as follows:
  (47) EXPENSES NOT IN EXCESS OF FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ACTUALLY  INCURRED
 AND  PAID BY ELIGIBLE QUALIFIED PERSONNEL OR AN ELIGIBLE SERVICE COORDI-
 NATOR FOR EARLY INTERVENTION SUPPLIES, ACTUALLY USED AND USEFUL, TO  THE
 EXTENT  NOT  DEDUCTIBLE IN DETERMINING FEDERAL ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME AND
 NOT REIMBURSED. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE FOLLOWING  TERMS
 SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  (I)  "QUALIFIED  PERSONNEL" SHALL HAVE THE SAME MEANING AS SUBDIVISION
 FIFTEEN OF SECTION TWENTY-FIVE HUNDRED FORTY-ONE OF  THE  PUBLIC  HEALTH
 LAW.
  (II)  "SERVICE COORDINATOR" SHALL HAVE THE SAME MEANING AS SUBDIVISION
 SIXTEEN OF SECTION TWENTY-FIVE HUNDRED FORTY-ONE OF  THE  PUBLIC  HEALTH
 LAW.
  (III)  "EARLY  INTERVENTION  SUPPLIES" SHALL MEAN BOOKS, SUPPLIES, AND
 OTHER EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS USED  BY  ELIGIBLE  QUALIFIED
 PERSONNEL  OR  AN ELIGIBLE SERVICE COORDINATOR IN THE FURTHERANCE OF HIS
 OR HER PROFESSIONAL DUTIES.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately and shall apply to taxable
 years beginning on or after January 1, 2025.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13767-01-3