# Requires the reporting of completed judicial training as mandated by part 17 of the rules of the chief judge of the New York state unified court system

**Bill ID:** S7827
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jessica Ramos
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7827 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7827)

## Summary

Requires the reporting of completed judicial training as mandated by part 17 of the rules of the chief judge of the New York state unified court system.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7827
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  December 20, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  RAMOS  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the judiciary law, in relation to requiring the  report-
  ing of completed judicial training as mandated by part 17 of the rules
  of the chief judge of the New York state unified court system

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 2 of  section  212  of  the  judiciary  law  is
 amended by adding a new paragraph (ff) to read as follows:
  (FF)  REPORT  ON  MANDATORY  JUDICIAL  TRAINING. EACH JUDGE OR JUSTICE
 DESIGNATED IN PART SEVENTEEN OF THE RULES OF THE CHIEF JUDGE OF THE  NEW
 YORK  STATE  UNIFIED  COURT  SYSTEM  SHALL  BE  SUBJECT TO THE REPORTING
 REQUIREMENTS OF THIS PARAGRAPH. ON JANUARY TENTH OF EACH YEAR, THE CHIEF
 ADMINISTRATOR SHALL RELEASE A  PUBLIC  REPORT  ON  THE  NEW  YORK  STATE
 UNIFIED  COURT  SYSTEM  WEBSITE AND DELIVER SUCH REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR,
 THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE, AND THE SPEAKER OF THE  ASSEMBLY.
 THE INITIAL REPORT SHALL INCLUDE A LIST OF JUDGES AND JUSTICES IDENTIFY-
 ING  ANY  INCOMPLETE TRAINING THAT IS PAST DUE AND ALL SUBSEQUENT ANNUAL
 REPORTS SHALL INCLUDE THE COMPLETION STATUS OF  EACH  TRAINING  BY  EACH
 JUDGE  OR JUSTICE DESIGNATED IN PART SEVENTEEN OF THE RULES OF THE CHIEF
 JUDGE OF THE NEW YORK STATE UNIFIED COURT SYSTEM. SUCH REPORT SHALL ALSO
 INCLUDE THE DEADLINE FOR WHICH EACH TRAINING WAS DUE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13659-01-3