# Relates to requiring gender neutral bathrooms in state-owned buildings

**Bill ID:** S7844AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Julia Salazar
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7844AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7844AA)

## Summary

Relates to requiring gender neutral bathrooms in state-owned buildings; requires each state agency to ensure, to the extent practicable, that all state-owned and state-leased buildings under its jurisdiction have at least one multiple-occupancy bathroom in such building designated as gender neutral.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7844--A
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  December 29, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SALAZAR -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules  --  recommitted  to
  the  Committee  on Investigations and Government Operations in accord-
  ance with Senate Rule 6, sec. 8 -- committee discharged, bill amended,
  ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee

 AN ACT to amend the public  buildings  law,  in  relation  to  requiring
  gender neutral bathrooms in state-owned buildings
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The section heading of section 145 of the public  buildings
 law,  as amended by chapter 14 of the laws of 2020, is amended, subdivi-
 sion 1 is amended by adding a new paragraph (e), and a new subdivision 3
 is added to read as follows:
  Gender neutral [single-occupancy] bathrooms.
  (E) "MULTIPLE-OCCUPANCY BATHROOM" MEANS  A  ROOM  OR  SUITE  OF  ROOMS
 CONTAINING AT LEAST ONE SINK AND AT LEAST TWO SANITARY FIXTURES, SUCH AS
 TOILETS  OR  URINALS, INTENDED FOR SIMULTANEOUS USE BY TWO OR MORE OCCU-
 PANTS.
  3. EACH STATE AGENCY SHALL ENSURE, TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THAT ALL
 STATE-OWNED AND STATE-LEASED BUILDINGS UNDER ITS  JURISDICTION  HAVE  AT
 LEAST  ONE  MULTIPLE-OCCUPANCY  BATHROOM  IN SUCH BUILDING DESIGNATED AS
 GENDER NEUTRAL.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02065-03-4