# Designates Kwanzaa as a public holiday

**Bill ID:** S7899
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7899 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7899)

## Summary

Designates Kwanzaa as a public holiday in New York.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7899
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  PARKER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the general construction law, in relation to the  desig-
  nation of Kwanzaa as a public holiday
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 24 of the general construction law, as  amended  by
 chapter 249 of the laws of 2020, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 24. Public holidays; half-holidays. The term public holiday includes
 the  following days in each year: the first day of January, known as New
 Year's day; the third Monday of January,  known  as  Dr.  Martin  Luther
 King, Jr. day; the twelfth day of February, known as Lincoln's birthday;
 the  third  Monday in February, known as Washington's birthday; the last
 Monday in May, known as Memorial day; the second Sunday in  June,  known
 as Flag day; the nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth; the fourth
 day  of  July, known as Independence day; the first Monday in September,
 known as Labor day; the second Monday in October, known as Columbus day;
 the eleventh day of November, known as Veterans' day; the fourth  Thurs-
 day  in November, known as Thanksgiving day; and the twenty-fifth day of
 December, known as Christmas day, THE PERIOD OF TIME BEGINNING THE TWEN-
 TY-SIXTH DAY OF DECEMBER AND ENDING THE FIRST DAY OF JANUARY,  KNOWN  AS
 KWANZAA, and if any of such days except Flag day is Sunday, the next day
 thereafter;  each  general  election  day, and each day appointed by the
 president of the United States or by the governor of this state as a day
 of general thanksgiving, general fasting and prayer,  or  other  general
 religious  observances.  The  term half-holiday includes the period from
 noon to midnight of each Saturday which is not a public holiday.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07024-01-3