# Requires that plaintiffs no longer have to prove that a sexual offense occurred on the premises of, chattels or property belonging to a corporate entity

**Bill ID:** S7926
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Brad Hoylman-Sigal
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S7926 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7926)

## Summary

Requires that plaintiffs no longer have to prove that a sexual offense occurred on the premises of, chattels or property belonging to a corporate entity in action for negligent supervision.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7926
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HOYLMAN-SIGAL -- read twice and ordered printed, and
  when printed to be committed to the Committee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the general obligations law,  in  relation  to  changing
  what needs to be proven in an action for negligent supervision
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The general obligations law is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 18-202 to read as follows:
  ยง  18-202.  LIABILITY  FOR  NEGLIGENT  SUPERVISION  IN CASES OF SEXUAL
 OFFENSES. 1. FOR THE PURPOSES OF  THIS  SECTION,  A  "CORPORATE  ENTITY"
 SHALL  INCLUDE  ANY  FOREIGN  OR DOMESTIC CORPORATION, LIMITED LIABILITY
 COMPANY, LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP, OR OTHER CORPORATE ENTITY  DOING
 BUSINESS IN THIS STATE.
  2.  IN  ANY  CIVIL  ACTION AGAINST A CORPORATE ENTITY, OR ANY OFFICER,
 DIRECTOR, MEMBER OR MANAGER THEREOF, FOR  NEGLIGENT  SUPERVISION  OF  AN
 EMPLOYEE  OR AGENT ALLEGED TO HAVE ENGAGED IN CONDUCT THAT WOULD CONSTI-
 TUTE A SEXUAL OFFENSE AS DEFINED IN ARTICLE ONE HUNDRED  THIRTY  OF  THE
 PENAL  LAW, THE PLAINTIFF SHALL NOT BE REQUIRED TO PROVE THAT THE PERSON
 COMMITTING SUCH SEXUAL OFFENSE DID SO ON THE PREMISES OF, OR WITH  CHAT-
 TELS OR PROPERTY BELONGING TO, THE ALLEGEDLY NEGLIGENT CORPORATE ENTITY,
 OFFICER, DIRECTOR, MEMBER, OR MANAGER.
  ยง  2.  This  act  shall take effect immediately and shall apply to all
 pending actions and actions commenced on or after such date.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13826-01-3