# Requires the development of guidelines to help avert retraumatization of victims of sexual offenses in a behavioral health outpatient setting

**Bill ID:** S7968
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7968 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7968)

## Summary

Requires the development of guidelines and procedures by the office of mental health to help avert retraumatization of victims of sexual offenses in a behavioral health outpatient setting.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7968
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 4, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  PARKER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Mental Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the mental hygiene law, in relation to averting  retrau-
  matization of victims of sexual offenses in a behavioral health outpa-
  tient setting
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  The mental hygiene law is amended by adding a new  section
 7.50 to read as follows:
 ยง 7.50 VICTIMS OF SEXUAL OFFENSES; OUTPATIENT GROUP SETTING.
  THE  OFFICE  SHALL  DEVELOP  GUIDELINES  REGARDING  VICTIMS  OF SEXUAL
 OFFENSES RECEIVING SERVICES IN AN OUTPATIENT GROUP SETTING. SUCH  GUIDE-
 LINES  SHALL  OUTLINE  BEST  PRACTICES  PROVIDERS MAY USE WHEN PROVIDING
 SERVICES TO VICTIMS OF SEXUAL ABUSE IN AN EFFORT TO AVERT  RETRAUMATIZA-
 TION  BY KNOWN SEX OFFENDERS. SUCH BEST PRACTICES SHALL, TO THE GREATEST
 EXTENT POSSIBLE, BE BASED ON EVIDENCE BASED PRACTICES. IN CREATING  SUCH
 GUIDELINES,  THE OFFICE SHALL CONSULT WITH STAKEHOLDERS. SUCH STAKEHOLD-
 ERS SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO,  REPRESENTATIVES  OF  CONSUMER
 ADVOCATES, PROVIDERS AND VICTIM RIGHTS GROUPS.
  ยง  2.  The mental hygiene law is amended by adding a new section 19.44
 to read as follows:
 ยง 19.44 VICTIMS OF SEXUAL OFFENSES; OUTPATIENT GROUP SETTING.
  THE OFFICE  SHALL  DEVELOP  GUIDELINES  REGARDING  VICTIMS  OF  SEXUAL
 OFFENSES  RECEIVING SERVICES IN AN OUTPATIENT GROUP SETTING. SUCH GUIDE-
 LINES SHALL OUTLINE BEST PRACTICES  PROVIDERS  MAY  USE  WHEN  PROVIDING
 SERVICES  TO VICTIMS OF SEXUAL ABUSE IN AN EFFORT TO AVERT RETRAUMATIZA-
 TION BY KNOWN SEX OFFENDERS. SUCH BEST PRACTICES SHALL, TO THE  GREATEST
 EXTENT  POSSIBLE, BE BASED ON EVIDENCE BASED PRACTICES. IN CREATING SUCH
 GUIDELINES, THE OFFICE SHALL CONSULT WITH STAKEHOLDERS. SUCH  STAKEHOLD-
 ERS  SHALL  INCLUDE,  BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, REPRESENTATIVES OF CONSUMER
 ADVOCATES, PROVIDERS AND VICTIM RIGHTS GROUPS.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06007-01-3