# Relates to designating the county of Kings a cease and desist zone and establishing an affirmative defense to violations of nonsolicitation orders and cease and desist zones

**Bill ID:** S7971
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7971 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7971)

## Summary

Relates to designating the county of Kings a cease and desist zone; establishes an affirmative defense to violations of nonsolicitation orders and cease and desist zones.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7971
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 4, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. PARKER, PERSAUD, SALAZAR -- read twice and ordered
  printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee on  Judici-
  ary
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the real property law, in relation to designating the
  county of Kings a cease and desist zone and establishing  an  affirma-
  tive  defense  to  violations  of nonsolicitation orders and cease and
  desist zones

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  real property law is amended by adding a new section
 442-hh to read as follows:
  ยง 442-HH. DESIGNATING THE COUNTY OF KINGS A  CEASE  AND  DESIST  ZONE.
 NOTWITHSTANDING  ANY  OTHER LAW, RULE OR REGULATION TO THE CONTRARY, THE
 COUNTY OF KINGS SHALL BE INCLUDED ON THE CEASE AND DESIST LIST  COMPILED
 BY  THE  SECRETARY OF STATE PURSUANT TO SECTION FOUR HUNDRED FORTY-TWO-H
 OF THIS ARTICLE.
  ยง 2. Section 442-h of the real property law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 5 to read as follows:
  5. IN ANY ACTION ALLEGING A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION, IT SHALL BE  AN
 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE THAT THE OWNER OF RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY INCLUDED
 IN A NONSOLICITATION ORDER OR CEASE AND DESIST ZONE PUBLICIZED THAT SUCH
 PROPERTY  WAS FOR SALE THROUGH MEANS INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ADVER-
 TISEMENTS OR REAL ESTATE LISTINGS.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have  become  a law and shall apply to all nonsolicitation orders issued
 on and after such effective date.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07749-01-3