# Relates to adding dwelling occupants to residential dwelling or housing accommodation leases

**Bill ID:** S7983
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S7983 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S7983)

## Summary

Enacts the "fair addition in rental (F.A.I.R) leases act"; authorizes a tenant to add dwelling occupants to residential dwelling or housing accommodation leases upon request of the lease holder; if such occupant is at least 18 years old; and such occupant provides proof of currently residing in such dwelling; prohibits a landlord from increasing the rent or imposing a fee for the purpose of adding occupants to the lease.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7983
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 4, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Housing, Construction  and
  Community Development
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  real  property  actions and proceedings law, in
  relation to adding dwelling occupants to residential dwelling or hous-
  ing accommodation leases

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Short title. This act shall be known and may be cited as
 the "Fair Addition in Rental (F.A.I.R.) Leases Act".
  ยง 2. The real property actions  and  proceedings  law  is  amended  by
 adding two new sections 711-a and 711-b to read as follows:
  ยง 711-A. LEASES; ADD DWELLING OCCUPANTS. A LANDLORD IS REQUIRED TO ADD
 OCCUPANTS  OF  A  RESIDENTIAL  DWELLING  OR HOUSING ACCOMMODATION TO THE
 LEASE:
  1. UPON REQUEST BY THE LEASE HOLDER;
  2. IF THE OCCUPANT IS AT LEAST EIGHTEEN YEARS OLD;
  3. IF THE OCCUPANT CAN SHOW PROOF OF CURRENTLY RESIDING IN SUCH  RESI-
 DENTIAL  DWELLING OR HOUSING ACCOMMODATION.  SUCH PROOF MAY INCLUDE, BUT
 NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (A) WATER, ELECTRICITY, GAS, TELEPHONE OR INTERNET BILL;
  (B) CREDIT CARD BILL OR STATEMENT;
  (C) LETTER ISSUED BY A PUBLIC AUTHORITY;
  (D) COMPANY PAYSLIP OR CHECK;
  (E) HOME OR RENTAL INSURANCE POLICY;
  (F) CAR REGISTRATION OR INSURANCE;
  (G) LETTER OF EMPLOYMENT;
  (H) OFFICIAL LETTER FROM AN EDUCATIONAL  INSTITUTION  ON  SUCH  INSTI-
 TUTION'S LETTERHEAD;
  (I) MUNICIPALITY OR GOVERNMENT TAX LETTER;
  (J) DRIVER'S LICENSE; OR
  (K) RESIDENCE PERMIT.
  ยง  711-B. LANDLORD; PROHIBITION OF RENT INCREASE OR IMPOSITION OF FEE.
 A LANDLORD IS PROHIBITED FROM INCREASING THE RENT OR IMPOSING A FEE  FOR

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13754-04-3
 S. 7983  2
 
 THE  PURPOSE  OF ADDING OCCUPANTS TO THE LEASE PURSUANT TO SECTION SEVEN
 HUNDRED ELEVEN-A OF THIS ARTICLE.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law.