# Relates to the practice of dentistry

**Bill ID:** S8098
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew Gounardes
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8098 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8098)

## Summary

Removes references of law related to restoring and maintaining dental health.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8098
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 8, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. GOUNARDES -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Higher Education
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  education  law,  in relation to the practice of
  dentistry
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Section  6601 of the education law, as amended by chapter
 576 of the laws of 2001, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 6601. Definition of practice  of  dentistry.  The  practice  of  the
 profession  of  dentistry is defined as diagnosing, treating, operating,
 or prescribing for any disease, pain,  injury,  deformity,  or  physical
 condition  of  the oral and maxillofacial area [related to restoring and
 maintaining dental health].  The  practice  of  dentistry  includes  the
 prescribing  and  fabrication  of  dental prostheses and appliances. The
 practice of dentistry may include  performing  physical  evaluations  in
 conjunction with the provision of dental treatment.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11290-01-3