# Relates to penalties for promotion of a suicide attempt

**Bill ID:** S8181
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Rolison
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8181 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8181)

## Summary

Provides that a person may be charged with promoting a suicide or manslaughter if he or she is convicted of endangering the welfare of a vulnerable elderly person, an incompetent or physically disabled person and the conduct was the proximate cause of the victim's suicide.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8181
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 11, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ROLISON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to penalties for promotion of
  a suicide attempt
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Section  120.30  of  the  penal law is amended to read as
 follows:
 ยง 120.30 Promoting a suicide attempt.
  A person is guilty of promoting a suicide attempt when:
  (A) he OR SHE intentionally causes or aids another person  to  attempt
 suicide; OR
  (B)  HE  OR  SHE ENDANGERS THE WELFARE OF AN INCOMPETENT, A VULNERABLE
 ELDERLY PERSON OR A PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON AS SET FORTH  IN  SECTION
 260.25,  260.32 OR 260.34 OF THIS CHAPTER AND SUCH CONDUCT SIGNIFICANTLY
 CONTRIBUTED TO THE VICTIM'S SUICIDE ATTEMPT.
  Promoting a suicide attempt is a class E felony.
  ยง 2. Section 125.15 of the penal law is amended to read as follows:
 ยง 125.15 Manslaughter in the second degree.
  A person is guilty of manslaughter in the second degree when:
  1. He OR SHE recklessly causes the death of another person; or
  [3.] 2. He OR SHE intentionally  causes  or  aids  another  person  to
 commit suicide;
  3.  HE  OR  SHE  ENDANGERS THE WELFARE OF AN INCOMPETENT, A VULNERABLE
 ELDERLY PERSON, OR A PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON AS SET FORTH IN  SECTION
 260.25,  260.32 OR 260.34 OF THIS CHAPTER AND SUCH CONDUCT SIGNIFICANTLY
 CONTRIBUTED TO THE VICTIM'S SUICIDE.
  Manslaughter in the second degree is a class C felony.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01443-01-3