# Requires recommendation of blood lead level screenings when a health care provider finds high lead levels in blood of a child

**Bill ID:** S8186
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8186 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8186)

## Summary

Requires the recommendation to a parent for blood lead level screenings of his or her child when a health care provider finds high lead levels in the blood of such child; directs the department of health to conduct an environmental investigation when a child is found to have high levels of lead in his or her blood.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8186
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 11, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to screening for lead
  poisoning in children
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Section  1370-e  of  the  public health law is amended by
 adding two new subdivisions 6 and 7 to read as follows:
  6. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REQUIRE PRIMARY CARE  PROVIDERS  TO  RECOMMEND
 FOLLOW UP BLOOD LEAD LEVEL SCREENINGS TO PARENTS OF CHILDREN WHOSE BLOOD
 LEAD  LEVELS  TEST AT NOT LESS THAN 15 MICROGRAMS PER DECILITER OF WHOLE
 BLOOD UP TO 24.99 MICROGRAMS PER DECILITER OF WHOLE BLOOD.
  7. IF A CHILD'S BLOOD LEVEL TEST IS ABOVE 25 MICROGRAMS PER  DECILITER
 OF  WHOLE BLOOD, THE COMMISSIONER OR HIS DESIGNEE SHALL TAKE APPROPRIATE
 MEASURES TO ENSURE THAT AN ENVIRONMENTAL INVESTIGATION, AS  REQUIRED  BY
 SUBPART  67-2  OF TITLE TEN OF THE NEW YORK STATE CODES, RULES AND REGU-
 LATIONS, IS COMPLETED. IF THE DEPARTMENT FINDS  THAT  THE  INVESTIGATION
 HAS  NOT  BEEN COMPLETED WITHIN ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY DAYS OF ITS NOTICE OF
 THE BLOOD LEAD LEVEL FINDING, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COMPLETE SUCH  INVES-
 TIGATION  IMMEDIATELY.  THE  DEPARTMENT  MAY TAKE REASONABLE MEASURES TO
 COLLECT  THE  COSTS  OF  CONDUCTING  THESE  ASSESSMENTS  FROM  ENTITIES
 ORIGINALLY RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING THEM.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00745-01-3