# Requires the New York state energy research and development authority conduct a study on independent neighborhoods and homes in cities constructing micro-grids

**Bill ID:** S8190
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S8190 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8190)

## Summary

Requires the New York state energy research and development authority conduct a study on independent neighborhoods and homes in cities constructing micro-grids to study the feasibility, efficiency, and energy saving costs if such micro-grids were constructed.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8190
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 11, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  PARKER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on  Energy  and  Telecommuni-
  cations
 
 AN  ACT  directing  the  New  York state energy research and development
  authority  to  study  feasibility  and  efficiency  of  independently
  constructed micro-grids for homes and neighborhoods

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this act:
  (a) "City" shall mean any city with a population  greater  than  sixty
 thousand.
  (b)  "Neighborhood" shall have the same meaning as "neighborhood unit"
 as defined in section 2 of the private housing finance law.
  ยง 2. The New York state energy research and development  authority  is
 authorized and directed to study the feasibility, efficiency, and energy
 saving  costs  for  cities if individuals homes or neighborhoods were to
 create their own independent micro-grids. Such study shall include,  but
 not be limited to:
  (a)  the cost of constructing a micro-grid to power independent neigh-
 borhoods and homes;
  (b) the feasibility of constructing a micro-grid for neighborhoods and
 homes;
  (c) the efficiency of a micro-grid for neighborhoods and homes;
  (d) the cost of operations to run a micro-grid for  neighborhoods  and
 homes;
  (e) the potential effects of independent micro-grids for neighborhoods
 and homes lessening the stress on current electrical systems; and
  (f) the potential cost savings of independent micro-grids.
  ยง  3.  The  New  York  state energy research and development authority
 shall make a report to the governor and the legislature of its findings,
 conclusions, and recommendations no later than seven  months  after  the
 effective date of this act and shall submit with this report such legis-
 lative proposals as it deems necessary to implement its recommendations.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect immediately.

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14009-01-4