# Relates to establishing when a tip credit applies to employees working at tipped and non-tipped occupations on the same day

**Bill ID:** S8200
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Leroy Comrie
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8200 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8200)

## Summary

Establishes when a tip credit applies to employees working at tipped and non-tipped occupations on the same day.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8200
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 12, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COMRIE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Labor
 
 AN ACT to amend the labor law, in relation to establishing  when  a  tip
  credit  applies  to employees working at tipped and non-tipped occupa-
  tions on the same day
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The labor law is amended by adding a new section 652-a to
 read as follows:
  ยง 652-A. WORKING AT TIPPED AND NON-TIPPED OCCUPATIONS ON THE SAME DAY.
 ON ANY DAY THAT A SERVICE EMPLOYEE OR FOOD SERVICE  WORKER  WORKS  AT  A
 NON-TIPPED  OCCUPATION FOR MORE THAN TWENTY PERCENT OF HIS OR HER SHIFT,
 THE WAGES OF SUCH EMPLOYEE SHALL BE SUBJECT TO NO  TIP  CREDIT  FOR  THE
 TIME  WORKING  AT  THE  NON-TIPPED  OCCUPATION  DURING  THAT DAY. A FOOD
 SERVICE WORKER'S CUSTOMARY SIDE WORK THAT IS ANCILLARY  TO  HIS  OR  HER
 OCCUPATION  AND  WHICH IS REGULARLY AND CUSTOMARILY PERFORMED AS PART OF
 HIS OR HER REGULAR JOB DUTIES SHALL NOT BE CONSIDERED  WORK  AT  A  NON-
 TIPPED  OCCUPATION. IF AN EMPLOYEE FOR WHOM AN EMPLOYER IMPROPERLY TAKES
 A TIP CREDIT PARTICIPATES IN A TIP POOL WITH EMPLOYEES FOR  WHOM  A  TIP
 CREDIT  IS  PROPERLY  TAKEN,  THE  EMPLOYER  SHALL ONLY BE LIABLE TO THE
 EMPLOYEE FOR WHOM THE TIP CREDIT WAS IMPROPERLY TAKEN.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03704-01-3