# Authorizes the city of Olean assessor to accept an application for a real property tax exemption from Olean Community Theatre, Inc.

**Bill ID:** S8227
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** George Borrello
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8227 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8227)

## Summary

Authorizes the county of Cattaraugus assessor to accept an application for a real property tax exemption from Olean Community Theatre, Inc. for all of the 2021-2022 school taxes and all of the 2022 general taxes.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8227
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 16, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. BORRELLO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Local Government
 
 AN ACT in relation to authorizing the city of Olean assessor  to  accept
  an  application for a real property tax exemption from Olean Community
  Theatre, Inc.
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
 the assessor of the county of Cattaraugus is hereby authorized to accept
 Olean  Community  Theatre,  Inc.  an application for exemption from real
 property taxes pursuant to section 420-a of the real  property  tax  law
 with  respect  to the 2021-2022 assessment roll for all of the 2021-2022
 school taxes and all of the 2022 general taxes for the  parcel  conveyed
 to  such  organization located at 127 South Barry Street, city of Olean,
 county of Cattaraugus, otherwise known as Cattaraugus county  parcel  ID
 map  94.065  block  7  parcel  38. If accepted, the application shall be
 reviewed as if it had been received on or before the taxable status date
 established for such roll.
  If satisfied that such organization would  otherwise  be  entitled  to
 such  exemption  if  such  organization  had  filed  an  application for
 exemption by the appropriate taxable status  date,  the  assessor,  upon
 approval  by  the  city  of  Olean  legislature,  may  make  appropriate
 correction to the subject roll. If such exemption is  granted  and  such
 organization,  therefore,  shall  have  paid any tax with respect to the
 subject roll, the applicable governing body or tax  department  may,  in
 its  sole  discretion,  provide  for  the refund of those taxes paid and
 cancel those  taxes,  fines,  penalties,  liens  or  interest  remaining
 unpaid.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13798-01-3