# Prohibits the sale of covered license plate frames

**Bill ID:** S8322
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Leroy Comrie
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8322 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8322)

## Summary

Prohibits the sale of covered license plate frames; defines a covered license plate frame to mean any glass or plastic material, artificial or synthetic material or substance that conceals or obscures a license plate or that distorts a recorded or photographic image of such license plate.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8322
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 18, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COMRIE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Consumer Protection
 
 AN ACT to amend the general business law, in relation to prohibiting the
  sale of covered license plate frames
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The general business law is amended by adding a new section
 391-uu to read as follows:
  ยง  391-UU.  SALE  OR PROMOTIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF COVERED LICENSE PLATE
 FRAMES. 1.  NO  PERSON,  FIRM,  CORPORATION,  PARTNERSHIP,  ASSOCIATION,
 LIMITED  LIABILITY  COMPANY, OR OTHER ENTITY SHALL SELL OR OFFER TO SELL
 OR GIVE AWAY, AS EITHER A  RETAIL  OR  WHOLESALE  PROMOTION,  A  COVERED
 LICENSE PLATE FRAME WITHIN NEW YORK STATE.
  2.  FOR  PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "COVERED LICENSE PLATE FRAME" MEANS
 ANY GLASS OR PLASTIC  MATERIAL,  ARTIFICIAL  OR  SYNTHETIC  MATERIAL  OR
 SUBSTANCE  THAT  CONCEALS OR OBSCURES A LICENSE PLATE OR THAT DISTORTS A
 RECORDED OR PHOTOGRAPHIC IMAGE OF SUCH LICENSE PLATE.
  3. ANY PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION,  PARTNERSHIP,  ASSOCIATION,  LIMITED
 LIABILITY  COMPANY, OR OTHER ENTITY THAT VIOLATES THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
 SECTION BY SELLING, OFFERING TO SELL, OR GIVING AWAY AS EITHER A  RETAIL
 OR  WHOLESALE  PROMOTION, A COVERED LICENSE PLATE FRAME SHALL BE SUBJECT
 TO A CIVIL PENALTY OF NOT MORE THAN FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS PER  VIOLATION,
 RECOVERABLE  IN AN ACTION BY ANY ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY DESIGNATED BY ANY
 MUNICIPALITY OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08827-01-3