# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the Boston volunteer firefighters David Hadley, Eugene Schmitt, Dana Stevens and Donald Pfarner memorial bridge

**Bill ID:** S8328
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Patrick M. Gallivan
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8328 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8328)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Boston Volunteer Firefighters David Hadley, Eugene Schmitt, Dana Stevens and Donald Pfarner Memorial Bridge".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8328
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 18, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. GALLIVAN -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "Boston Volunteer  Firefighters  David
  Hadley,  Eugene  Schmitt,  Dana  Stevens  and  Donald Pfarner Memorial
  Bridge"

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 342-aaa
 to read as follows:
  ยง 342-AAA. PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "BOSTON VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS DAVID HADLEY, EUGENE SCHMITT, DANA  STEV-
 ENS  AND  DONALD PFARNER MEMORIAL BRIDGE". THE BRIDGE ON RICE HILL ROAD,
 IN THE TOWN OF BOSTON, COUNTY OF ERIE, CROSSING  OVER  STATE  ROUTE  TWO
 HUNDRED NINETEEN, SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS THE "BOSTON VOLUNTEER
 FIREFIGHTERS DAVID HADLEY, EUGENE SCHMITT, DANA STEVENS AND DONALD PFAR-
 NER MEMORIAL BRIDGE".
  ยง  2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the instal-
 lation and maintenance of adequate signing of the state  highway  system
 as  designated  pursuant  to  section one of this act. However, to avoid
 confusion and to limit any possible disruption of commerce,  the  desig-
 nation  called  for  pursuant to section one of this act shall be one of
 ceremonial nature and the official name of  such  bridge  shall  not  be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14089-01-4