# Relates to designating a portion of the state highway system as the "T Sgt Walter Shearing Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** S8338A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** George Borrello
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S8338A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8338A)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system in the village of Gainesville as the "T Sgt Walter Shearing Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8338
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 18, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. BORRELLO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "T Sgt. Walter Shearing Memorial High-
  way"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-p to
 read as follows:
  ยง  344-P.  PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "T SGT. WALTER SHEARING MEMORIAL HIGHWAY". ALL THAT PORTION OF THE STATE
 HIGHWAY SYSTEM CONSTITUTING STATE ROUTE NINETEEN FROM EDDY ROAD  IN  THE
 TOWN  OF  GAINESVILLE,  COUNTY  OF  WYOMING,  TO EAST MILL STREET IN THE
 VILLAGE OF GAINESVILLE, COUNTY OF WYOMING, SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN
 AS THE "T SGT. WALTER SHEARING MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".
  ยง 2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the  instal-
 lation  and  maintenance of adequate signing of the state highway system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this  act.  However,  to  avoid
 confusion  and  to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the desig-
 nation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall  be  one  of
 ceremonial  nature  and  the  official name of such highway shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06832-02-4