# Enacts the "harmful algal bloom monitoring and prevention act"

**Bill ID:** S8356AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Rachel May
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S8356AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8356AA)

## Summary

Enacts the "harmful algal bloom monitoring and prevention act"; establishes the harmful algal bloom monitoring and prevention fund.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8356--A
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 22, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sens. MAY, HARCKHAM -- read twice and ordered printed, and
  when printed to be committed to the Committee on Environmental Conser-
  vation  -- reported favorably from said committee and committed to the
  Committee on Finance -- committee discharged,  bill  amended,  ordered
  reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee

 AN ACT to amend the environmental conservation law and the state finance
  law,  in  relation to enacting the "harmful algal bloom monitoring and
  prevention act"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Short  title. This act shall be known and may be cited as
 the "harmful algal bloom monitoring and prevention act".
  § 2. Legislative findings and declarations. The legislature finds that
 the state of New York has a responsibility to maintain  the  health  and
 safety  of  its abundant clean water resources, upon which the residents
 of New York state, as well as its many visitors, rely on  for  drinking,
 agriculture,  tourism,  recreation,  and  their livelihoods. Because the
 waters of the state are under threat by  harmful  algal  blooms  (HABS),
 which  are  known  to be toxic and even fatal to humans, pets, and wild-
 life, the state has a responsibility to provide  coordinated,  statewide
 monitoring,  evaluation,  prevention  and mitigation, going beyond water
 body-specific data collection and isolated mitigation efforts. While the
 causes of HABS are complex and varied, with a coordinated and  standard-
 ized approach to monitoring and evaluation, patterns can more readily be
 identified  to  isolate  the  combination of relevant causes specific to
 different bodies of water across the state and determine the most effec-
 tive targeted interventions. To address  this  threat,  the  state  must
 develop  and  maintain  a  comprehensive  state  clearinghouse  to bring
 together existing and new available statewide cross-sectional and longi-
 tudinal data and information on  harmful  algal  blooms,  potential  and
 known  causes,  best  practice  interventions,  expertise,  and  funding
 resources. This data and subsequent report  will  enable  the  state  to
 effectively  and efficiently administer a central grant program support-
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14115-03-4
 S. 8356--A  2
 
 ing data-driven best practices in prevention and mitigation  of  harmful
 algal blooms.
  §  3.  The  environmental  conservation law is amended by adding a new
 section 15-0519 to read as follows:
 § 15-0519. HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM MONITORING AND PREVENTION PROGRAM.
  1. DEFINITIONS. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING  TERMS
 SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  A.  "HARMFUL  ALGAL  BLOOMS"  SHALL  MEAN  GROWTHS  OF BLOOMS OF ALGAL
 SPECIES PRESENT IN FRESH OR SALT WATER THAT CAN PRODUCE TOXINS THAT  ARE
 HARMFUL  TO  PUBLIC  HEALTH,  THE ECONOMY, OR RECREATIONAL ENJOYMENT, OR
 THAT CAN IMPAIR WATER QUALITY AND THE NATURAL ECOLOGY THEREIN.
  B. "MUNICIPALITY" SHALL MEAN A COUNTY, CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE.
  C. "WATERS OF THE STATE" MEANS  ALL  WATERWAYS,  OR  BODIES  OF  WATER
 LOCATED WITHIN NEW YORK STATE OR THAT PART OF ANY BODY OF WATER WHICH IS
 ADJACENT  TO  NEW YORK STATE OVER WHICH THE STATE HAS TERRITORIAL JURIS-
 DICTION.
  2. COMPREHENSIVE STATEWIDE DATA COLLECTION CONSOLIDATION AND ANALYSIS;
 REPORT. A. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL  DEVELOP  A  PROGRAM  TO  FURTHER  THE
 COMPREHENSIVE  AND  CONSISTENT  COLLECTION,  CONSOLIDATION, ANALYSIS AND
 META-ANALYSIS OF STATEWIDE DATA RELATING TO THE MONITORING,  EVALUATION,
 PREVENTION, AND MITIGATION OF HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM OUTBREAKS. THE COMMIS-
 SIONER  SHALL  PROVIDE  GUIDELINES  FOR  THE  SUBMISSION OF EXISTING AND
 HISTORICAL HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM MONITORING, EVALUATION,  MITIGATION,  AND
 PREVENTION  DATA  AND  STRATEGIES  FROM RELEVANT INSTITUTIONS, ORGANIZA-
 TIONS, AND INDIVIDUALS WITH EXPERIENCE IN PEER-REVIEWED RESEARCH, GRANT-
 MAKING, OR OTHER LIKE ACTIVITIES IN THE AREA OF WATER  QUALITY  RELATING
 TO  THE  MONITORING,  EVALUATION,  PREVENTION, AND MITIGATION OF HARMFUL
 ALGAL BLOOM OUTBREAKS, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO  RESEARCH  PROGRAMS,
 CLINICS, LABS, AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT.
  B.  THE  DATA  COLLECTED,  CONSOLIDATED, AND ANALYZED SHALL CONSIST OF
 ELEMENTS INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LONGITUDINAL DATA ON THE INCIDENCE
 OF HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS, CONTEXTUAL FACTORS  THOUGHT  TO  BE  ASSOCIATED
 WITH  THE  INCIDENCE  OF HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS SUCH AS WATER TEMPERATURE,
 TURBIDITY, FLOW RATE,  SALINITY,  NUTRIENT  LEVELS  FOR  PHOSPHORUS  AND
 NITROGEN,  ACIDITY  (PH), DISSOLVED OXYGEN LEVELS, MONITORING AND EVALU-
 ATION OF WATERS OF THE STATE THAT DO NOT CONTAIN HARMFUL  ALGAL  BLOOMS,
 AND RESULTS OF HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM INTERVENTIONS IN NEW YORK STATE.
  C.  THE DATA COLLECTED, CONSOLIDATED, AND ANALYZED SHALL MEET A STAND-
 ARD THAT IS CONSISTENT WITH THE PRACTICES AND EXPERTISE OF INSTITUTIONS,
 ORGANIZATIONS, OR INDIVIDUALS WITH EXPERIENCE IN PEER-REVIEWED RESEARCH,
 GRANTMAKING, OR OTHER LIKE ACTIVITIES  IN  THE  AREA  OF  WATER  QUALITY
 RELATING  TO  THE  MONITORING, EVALUATION, PREVENTION, AND MITIGATION OF
 HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM OUTBREAKS, INCLUDING BUT  NOT  LIMITED  TO  RESEARCH
 PROGRAMS, CLINICS, LABS, AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT.
  D.  THE  DEPARTMENT SHALL ANNUALLY PUBLISH AND UPDATE A LIST OF VETTED
 BEST PRACTICE STRATEGIES FOR HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM MONITORING, EVALUATION,
 PREVENTION, AND MITIGATION, WHICH SHALL BE DIFFERENTIATED BY  REGION  OR
 WATER BODY WITH UNIQUE CONFIRMED CAUSAL PATHWAYS FOR THE RELATED HARMFUL
 ALGAL BLOOM OUTBREAK TRENDS. SUCH STRATEGIES SHALL BE SUPPORTED BY FIND-
 INGS OF THE HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM DATABASE CREATED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION
 THREE OF THIS SECTION, AS WELL AS EXTERNAL EVALUATION, INCLUDING BUT NOT
 LIMITED  TO  STRATEGIES APPROVED BY THE FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
 AGENCY, CERTIFICATION THAT SUCH STRATEGIES MEET OR EXCEED  THE  AMERICAN
 NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR HEALTH EFFECTS OF DRINKING WATER TREATMENT CHEMI-
 CALS  (NSF/ANSI/CAN-60), OR TESTING FOR EFFICACY BY CENTER OF EXCELLENCE
 IN HEALTHY WATER SOLUTIONS. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PUBLISH SUCH  LIST  AND
 S. 8356--A  3
 
 FINDINGS  SUPPORTING  THE  STRATEGIES  ON  SUCH LIST ON THE DEPARTMENT'S
 WEBSITE.
  E.  NO LATER THAN FIVE YEARS AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION,
 THE COMMISSIONER, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE COMMISSIONER  OF  AGRICULTURE
 AND MARKETS, SHALL PREPARE A REPORT PROVIDING COMPREHENSIVE ANALYSIS AND
 META-ANALYSIS  OF THE DATA COLLECTED PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION, INCLUDING
 FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ESTABLISHING, MAINTAINING, AND  IMPROV-
 ING UPON A COORDINATED SYSTEM OF MONITORING, EVALUATION, PREVENTION, AND
 MITIGATION  OF  HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM OUTBREAKS ACROSS NEW YORK STATE. THE
 DEPARTMENT SHALL:
  I. UPDATE THE REPORT AT LEAST ONCE EVERY FIVE YEARS AFTER THE  INITIAL
 COMPLETION OF THE REPORT;
  II. MAKE THE REPORT PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ON THE DEPARTMENT'S WEBSITE;
  III.  HOLD  AT LEAST SIX REGIONAL PUBLIC COMMENT HEARINGS ON THE DRAFT
 REPORT AND SUBSEQUENT UPDATES TO THE REPORT, INCLUDING THREE MEETINGS IN
 THE UPSTATE REGION AND THREE MEETINGS IN THE DOWNSTATE REGION, AND SHALL
 ALLOW AT LEAST ONE HUNDRED TWENTY DAYS  FOR  THE  SUBMISSION  OF  PUBLIC
 COMMENT;
  IV.  PROVIDE  MEANINGFUL  OPPORTUNITIES  FOR  PUBLIC  COMMENT FROM ALL
 SEGMENTS OF THE POPULATIONS THAT LIVE NEAR,  OR  ARE  RELIANT  UPON  FOR
 DRINKING,  RECREATION,  OR  ECONOMIC  ACTIVITY,  THE WATERS OF THE STATE
 INCLUDED IN THE REPORT;
  V. SEEK OUT INPUT FROM INSTITUTIONS  OR  ORGANIZATIONS  WITH  RELEVANT
 EXPERTISE,  CITIZEN  SCIENTISTS,  AND  LABS  TESTING  WATER  QUALITY  IN
 RELATION TO HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS;
  VI. IDENTIFY THE MAGNITUDE OF HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS  ACROSS  THE  STATE
 AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON REGULATORY MEASURES AND OTHER STATE OR LOCAL
 ACTIONS TO MONITOR, EVALUATE, PREVENT, OR MITIGATE HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS,
 INCLUDING  EXISTING  OPPORTUNITIES  FOR  COORDINATION OF FEDERAL, STATE,
 MUNICIPAL, AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS;
  VII. IDENTIFY  BEST  PRACTICES,  TECHNOLOGY,  AND  AVAILABLE  FEDERAL,
 STATE,  MUNICIPAL,  OR PRIVATE FUNDING FOR AND EXISTING EFFORTS IN MONI-
 TORING, EVALUATING, PREVENTING, AND MITIGATING HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS; AND
  VIII. IDENTIFY THE CURRENT NEED IN SPECIFIC BODIES OF  WATER  FOR  THE
 ESTABLISHMENT  OF  PROGRAMS  OR ORGANIZATIONS TO FURTHER THE MONITORING,
 EVALUATION, PREVENTION, AND MITIGATION OF HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS, AND  THE
 COSTS THEREFOR.
  3.  HARMFUL  ALGAL BLOOM DATABASE. A. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL ESTABLISH
 AND MAINTAIN A WEBSITE PROVIDING PUBLIC ACCESS TO A HARMFUL ALGAL  BLOOM
 DATABASE  WHICH SHALL CONTAIN ALL RELEVANT DATA, RESEARCH, AND REPORTING
 REQUIRED PURSUANT TO SUBDIVISION TWO OF THIS SECTION.
  B. SUCH DATABASE, AND ANALYSIS OF  THE  COMPREHENSIVE  STATEWIDE  DATA
 THEREIN,  SHALL  SUPPORT THE COORDINATION OF EFFORTS ACROSS THE STATE TO
 MONITOR, EVALUATE, PREVENT, AND MITIGATE HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS, AND SHALL
 INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  I. THE GEOLOCATION OF HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM OUTBREAKS,  AND  EFFORTS  TO
 MONITOR, EVALUATE, PREVENT, AND MITIGATE SUCH OUTBREAKS;
  II.  EXISTING  RESEARCH, ANALYSIS, OR REPORTS RELATING TO OUTBREAKS OF
 HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS IN THE WATERS OF THE STATE AND THE CAUSES  OF  SUCH
 OUTBREAKS;
  III.  KNOWN  OR  DEVELOPING  STRATEGIES  AND  BEST PRACTICES OF STATE,
 MUNICIPAL, AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS  THAT  MONITOR,  EVALUATE,
 PREVENT,  OR  MITIGATE  HARMFUL  ALGAL  BLOOM  OUTBREAKS, THE RESPECTIVE
 WATERS OF THE STATE IN WHICH SUCH STRATEGIES  AND  BEST  PRACTICES  HAVE
 BEEN CONDUCTED, AND THE GEOLOCATIONS OF SUCH WATERS;
 S. 8356--A  4

  IV.  AVAILABLE SOURCES OF FINANCING FOR ALGAL BLOOM MONITORING, EVALU-
 ATION, PREVENTION, AND MITIGATION, INCLUDING FEDERAL, STATE,  MUNICIPAL,
 AND/OR PRIVATE FUNDING, GRANTS, OR OTHER MONIES; AND
  V.  INFORMATION ON INSTITUTIONS WITH EXPERTISE IN PEER-REVIEWED GRANT-
 MAKING AND RESEARCH IN THE AREA OF WATER QUALITY  AND/OR  HARMFUL  ALGAL
 BLOOMS,  INCLUDING  BUT  NOT  LIMITED TO THE NEW YORK SEA GRANT AT STONY
 BROOK UNIVERSITY, THE NEW  YORK  WATER  RESOURCE  INSTITUTE  AT  CORNELL
 UNIVERSITY,  THE  CENTER  OF  EXCELLENCE IN HEALTHY WATER SOLUTIONS, THE
 BUREAU OF WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION, THE NEW YORK CITY DEPARTMENT OF ENVI-
 RONMENTAL PROTECTION, THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND MARKETS,  COMMU-
 NITY-BASED  NONPROFIT  ORGANIZATIONS  WITH  MISSIONS  THAT  SPECIFICALLY
 INVOLVE MONITORING, EVALUATING, MITIGATING, OR PREVENTING HARMFUL  ALGAL
 BLOOMS,  AND  ANY  OTHER  INSTITUTION  OR  ORGANIZATION  PROVIDING  DATA
 COMPILED PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION, AND THE CONTACT INFORMATION, RELEVANT
 RESEARCH PROGRAMS, CLINICS, LABS, STAFF, AND PUBLISHED RESEARCH OF  SUCH
 INSTITUTIONS.
  4. RULES AND REGULATIONS. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL, IN A MANNER WHICH IS
 COORDINATED  WITH AND SUPPORTS EFFORTS BY FEDERAL, STATE, MUNICIPAL, AND
 NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS, PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS TO:
  A.  LIMIT AND ELIMINATE THE CAUSES OF HARMFUL ALGAL  BLOOM  OUTBREAKS;
 AND
  B. MONITOR AND MITIGATE HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM OUTBREAKS.
  5.  PROGRAM  DEVELOPMENT. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL ESTABLISH AND SUPPORT
 NEW AND EXISTING PROGRAMS AND ORGANIZATIONS RELEVANT TO  THE  HEALTH  OF
 WATERS  OF  THE  STATE  THAT HAVE NOT IMPLEMENTED STRATEGIES TO MONITOR,
 EVALUATE, PREVENT, OR MITIGATE HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM OUTBREAKS.
  6. HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM GRANT PROGRAM.  IN ADDITION TO THE FINANCING TO
 BE IDENTIFIED PURSUANT TO SUBPARAGRAPH IV OF PARAGRAPH B OF  SUBDIVISION
 THREE OF THIS SECTION:
  A. THE COMMISSIONER, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE COMMISSIONER OF AGRICUL-
 TURE  AND  MARKETS, THE COMMISSIONER OF HEALTH, AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE
 EMPIRE STATE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION, SHALL ESTABLISH  A  HARMFUL  ALGAL
 BLOOM  GRANT  PROGRAM  WHICH  SHALL  PROVIDE  FUNDING TO MUNICIPALITIES,
 INTERMUNICIPAL ORGANIZATIONS, COMMUNITY-BASED  NONPROFITS,  OR  ACADEMIC
 INSTITUTIONS FOR THE DEPLOYMENT OF HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM MONITORING, EVAL-
 UATION, PREVENTION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES AND BEST PRACTICES.
  B.  THE  PROGRAM  SHALL  REQUIRE THAT APPLICANTS FOR THE HARMFUL ALGAL
 BLOOM GRANT PROGRAM CONDUCT AND SUBMIT A STUDY, AS PART OF THEIR  APPLI-
 CATION, ASSESSING THE MOST APPROPRIATE MITIGATION AND PREVENTION STRATE-
 GIES  FOR  RELEVANT  WATERS OF THE STATE AND BEST PRACTICES THEREFOR, AS
 INFORMED BY THE HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM DATABASE CREATED PURSUANT TO  SUBDI-
 VISION THREE OF THIS SECTION.
  C. IN DETERMINING WHICH APPLICANTS SHALL BE AWARDED GRANTS PURSUANT TO
 THIS  SUBDIVISION,  FIRST  PREFERENCE  SHALL  BE GIVEN TO APPLICANTS WHO
 PROPOSE STRATEGIES THAT INCORPORATE PRINCIPLES OF LEAST HARM AND  GREAT-
 EST  SAFETY TO APPLICATORS, THE PUBLIC, AND THE ENVIRONMENT, AND UTILIZE
 PASSIVE OR NON-CHEMICAL PHYSICAL CONTROLS, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO:
  I. AERATION;
  II. HYDROLOGICAL MANIPULATIONS;
  III. MECHANICAL MIXING;
  IV. RESERVOIR DRAWDOWN OR DESICCATION;
  V. SURFACE SKIMMING;
  VI. ULTRASOUND; OR
  VII. OTHER EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES, AS APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT.
  D. IN DETERMINING WHICH APPLICANTS SHALL BE AWARDED GRANTS PURSUANT TO
 THIS SUBDIVISION, SECOND PREFERENCE SHALL BE  GIVEN  TO  APPLICANTS  WHO
 S. 8356--A  5

 DEMONSTRATE  EXPERTISE WITH PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE TREATING WATER BODIES IN
 THE UNITED STATES LARGER THAN ONE THOUSAND ACRES,  WITH  PROVEN  SUCCESS
 USING ACCEPTED STRATEGIES, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO STRATEGIES THAT:
  I. ARE AIMED AT REDUCING CYANOTOXINS IN THE WATER TO LESS THAN HARMFUL
 LEVELS;
  II. EMPLOY READY-TO-USE TECHNOLOGY THAT IS MEANS TESTED, REPRODUCIBLE,
 AND  GENERALIZABLE,  WITHOUT  LIMITATION  OF  SIZE OR SHAPE OF THE WATER
 BODY;
  III. EMPLOY TECHNOLOGY WHICH ALLOWS FOR  APPLICATION  UNDER  EMERGENCY
 SITUATIONS AND WITHIN LESS THAN NINETY-SIX HOURS FROM APPROVAL;
  IV.  UTILIZE  PRODUCTS THAT ARE MODULAR AND CAN BE USED AS A PREVENTA-
 TIVE MEASURE;
  V. UTILIZE PRODUCTS THAT ARE QUICK AND EASY TO APPLY AND ARE GENERALLY
 RECOGNIZED AS SAFE TO THE APPLICATOR, PUBLIC, AND ENVIRONMENT;
  VI. UTILIZE PRODUCTS THAT FLOAT ON THE SURFACE OF THE WATER AND DO NOT
 SINK IMMEDIATELY TO THE BOTTOM OF THE WATER COLUMN;
  VII. UTILIZE PRODUCTS THAT ARE  DISTRIBUTED  AUTONOMOUSLY  ACROSS  THE
 WATER BODY AFTER A LOCALIZED APPLICATION;
  VIII.  UTILIZE  PRODUCTS  WITH  A  TIME-RELEASE MECHANISM THAT APPLIES
 CONSTANT AND PROLONGED OXIDATIVE STRESS OF THE  CYANOBACTERIA  TRIGGERED
 BY  THE  PROGRAMMED  CELL  DEATH  SIGNALING  CASCADE, RESULTING IN THEIR
 COLLAPSE; AND
  IX. UTILIZE PRODUCTS MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES.
  E. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL MAKE MONIES AVAILABLE FROM THE HARMFUL ALGAL
 BLOOM MONITORING AND PREVENTION FUND, AS ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO SECTION
 NINETY-NINE-SS OF THE STATE FINANCE  LAW,  WITHIN  AMOUNTS  APPROPRIATED
 THEREFOR, PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION.
  § 4. The state finance law is amended by adding a new section 99-ss to
 read as follows:
  §  99-SS. HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM MONITORING AND PREVENTION FUND. 1. THERE
 IS HEREBY ESTABLISHED IN THE JOINT CUSTODY OF THE STATE COMPTROLLER  AND
 COMMISSIONER  OF  TAXATION AND FINANCE A SPECIAL FUND TO BE KNOWN AS THE
 "HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOM MONITORING AND PREVENTION FUND".
  2. SUCH FUND SHALL CONSIST OF ALL REVENUES RECEIVED BY THE COMPTROLLER
 AND ALL OTHER MONEYS APPROPRIATED, CREDITED, OR TRANSFERRED THERETO FROM
 THE GENERAL FUND OR ANY OTHER FUND OR SOURCE PURSUANT  TO  LAW.  NOTHING
 CONTAINED IN THIS SECTION SHALL PREVENT THE STATE FROM RECEIVING GRANTS,
 GIFTS,  OR  BEQUESTS  FOR  THE PURPOSES OF SUCH FUND AND DEPOSITING THEM
 INTO SUCH FUND ACCORDING TO LAW.
  3. MONEYS SHALL BE PAID OUT OF THE FUND ON THE AUDIT  AND  WARRANT  OF
 THE COMPTROLLER ON VOUCHERS CERTIFIED OR APPROVED BY THE COMMISSIONER OF
 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION OR HIS OR HER DESIGNEE.
  4.  MONEYS OF THE FUND SHALL BE AVAILABLE TO THE COMMISSIONER OF ENVI-
 RONMENTAL CONSERVATION  FOR  THE  HARMFUL  ALGAL  BLOOM  MONITORING  AND
 PREVENTION  PROGRAM ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO SECTION 15-0519 OF THE ENVI-
 RONMENTAL CONSERVATION LAW.
  § 5. This act shall take effect one year after it shall have become  a
 law. Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or repeal of any
 rule  or  regulation necessary for the implementation of this act on its
 effective date are authorized to be made and completed on or before such
 effective date.