# Creates a single, streamlined process whereby combination pre-kindergarten and daycare programs may be certified to operate

**Bill ID:** S8363
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Rachel May
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S8363 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8363)

## Summary

Creates a single, streamlined process whereby a facility or program operating both a pre-kindergarten program and a daycare program may apply for and receive any certification, licensing, or other requirement otherwise necessary to operate a pre-kindergarten program or daycare program under the laws of the state.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8363
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 22, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  MAY  --  read  twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation  to  creating  a  single,
  streamlined  process  whereby combination pre-kindergarten and daycare
  programs may be certified to operate
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 3602-
 eee to read as follows:
  ยง 3602-EEE. COMBINATION PRE-KINDERGARTEN AND DAYCARE PROGRAMS. 1.  FOR
 THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOW-
 ING MEANINGS:
  (A)  "PRE-KINDERGARTEN  PROGRAM"  MEANS  ANY  PRE-KINDERGARTEN PROGRAM
 OPERATING PURSUANT TO SECTION THIRTY-SIX  HUNDRED  TWO-E  OR  THIRTY-SIX
 HUNDRED TWO-EE OF THIS PART, OR ANY OTHER RULE OR REGULATION PROMULGATED
 BY THE DEPARTMENT.
  (B)  "DAYCARE  PROGRAM"  MEANS  ANY  CHILD  DAY  CARE, AS SUCH TERM IS
 DEFINED BY SECTION THREE HUNDRED NINETY OF THE SOCIAL SERVICES LAW.
  2. THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONJUNCTION WITH  THE  OFFICE  OF  CHILDREN  AND
 FAMILY  SERVICES,  SHALL  CREATE A SINGLE, STREAMLINED PROCESS WHEREBY A
 FACILITY OR PROGRAM OPERATING BOTH  A  PRE-KINDERGARTEN  PROGRAM  AND  A
 DAYCARE  PROGRAM MAY APPLY FOR AND RECEIVE ANY CERTIFICATION, LICENSING,
 OR OTHER REQUIREMENT OTHERWISE NECESSARY TO OPERATE  A  PRE-KINDERGARTEN
 PROGRAM OR DAYCARE PROGRAM UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE.
  3. THE DEPARTMENT AND THE OFFICE OF CHILDREN AND FAMILY SERVICES SHALL
 BE  AUTHORIZED  TO  PROMULGATE ANY RULES AND/OR REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO
 EFFECTUATE THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or
 repeal  of  any  rule  or regulation necessary for the implementation of
 this act on its effective date are authorized to be made  and  completed
 on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14149-01-4