# Establishes a manufactured housing tax credit

**Bill ID:** S8458
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Pamela Helming
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8458 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8458)

## Summary

Establishes a manufactured housing tax credit which provides for a credit of up to two thousand dollars for each new manufactured home that the taxpayer constructed and for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued on or after January first, two thousand twenty-four and on or before December thirty-first, two thousand thirty.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8458
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 31, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. HELMING -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Investigations and Govern-
  ment Operations
 
 AN ACT to amend the tax law, in relation to establishing a  manufactured
  housing tax credit
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The tax law is amended by adding a new section 49  to  read
 as follows:
  ยง 49. MANUFACTURED HOUSING TAX CREDIT. A TAXPAYER SUBJECT TO TAX UNDER
 ARTICLE  NINE-A OR ARTICLE TWENTY-TWO OF THIS CHAPTER SHALL BE ALLOWED A
 CREDIT OF UP TO TWO THOUSAND DOLLARS AGAINST SUCH TAX FOR EACH NEW MANU-
 FACTURED HOME THAT THE TAXPAYER INSTALLED AND FOR WHICH A CERTIFICATE OF
 OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN ISSUED ON OR AFTER JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND  TWEN-
 TY-FOUR AND ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER THIRTY-FIRST, TWO THOUSAND THIRTY.
  ยง  2. Section 210-b of the tax law is amended by adding a new subdivi-
 sion 60 to read as follows:
  60. A TAXPAYER SHALL BE ALLOWED A CREDIT OF UP TO TWO THOUSAND DOLLARS
 AGAINST SUCH TAX FOR  EACH  NEW  MANUFACTURED  HOME  THAT  THE  TAXPAYER
 INSTALLED AND FOR WHICH A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN ISSUED ON OR
 AFTER  JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR AND ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER
 THIRTY-FIRST, TWO THOUSAND THIRTY.
  ยง 3. Section 606 of the tax law is amended by adding a new  subsection
 (ppp) to read as follows:
  (PPP)  MANUFACTURED HOUSING TAX CREDIT.  A TAXPAYER SHALL BE ALLOWED A
 CREDIT OF UP TO TWO THOUSAND DOLLARS AGAINST SUCH TAX FOR EACH NEW MANU-
 FACTURED HOME THAT THE TAXPAYER INSTALLED AND FOR WHICH A CERTIFICATE OF
 OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN ISSUED ON OR AFTER JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND  TWEN-
 TY-FOUR AND ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER THIRTY-FIRST, TWO THOUSAND THIRTY.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11716-02-4