# Relates to certain benefits provided pursuant to collective bargaining agreements

**Bill ID:** S8459
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Jackson
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8459 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8459)

## Summary

Relates to certain benefits provided pursuant to collective bargaining agreements; provides that the temporary president of the senate and speaker of the assembly shall approve changes to health benefits for employees or retirees not subject to a collective bargaining agreement.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8459
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  January 31, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. JACKSON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Civil Service and Pensions
 
 AN ACT to amend the civil  service  law  and  the  legislative  law,  in
  relation  to certain benefits provided pursuant to collective bargain-
  ing agreements
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Subdivision 8 of section 167 of the civil service law, as
 amended by section 2 of part A of chapter 491 of the laws  of  2011,  is
 amended to read as follows:
  8. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, where and to the
 extent  that an agreement between the state and an employee organization
 entered into pursuant to article fourteen of this chapter  so  provides,
 the state cost of premium or subscription charges for eligible employees
 covered  by such agreement may be modified pursuant to the terms of such
 agreement. The president, with the approval of the director of the budg-
 et, THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE AND THE SPEAKER OF THE  ASSEM-
 BLY,  may  extend  the  modified  state  cost of premium or subscription
 charges for employees or retirees not subject to an agreement referenced
 above and shall promulgate the necessary rules or regulations to  imple-
 ment this provision.
  ยง 2. The legislative law is amended by adding a new section 49 to read
 as follows:
  ยง  49.  LEGISLATION  IMPLEMENTING  COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  AGREEMENTS.
 LEGISLATION WHICH ENACTS OR AMENDS ANY PROVISION OF LAW FOR THE  PURPOSE
 OF IMPLEMENTING AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE STATE AND AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZA-
 TION  ENTERED INTO PURSUANT TO ARTICLE FOURTEEN OF THE CIVIL SERVICE LAW
 SHALL BE LIMITED TO THE PROVISIONS NECESSARY TO  IMPLEMENT  SUCH  AGREE-
 MENT.
  ยง  3.  This  act  shall take effect immediately and shall apply to all
 agreements entered into on and after such effective date.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10400-01-3