# Relates to requests for employee personnel records

**Bill ID:** S8509AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Jackson
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8509AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8509AA)

## Summary

Requires agencies and public employers to provide notice and a review period to employees whose personnel records have been provided pursuant to the state's freedom of information law.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8509--A
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 7, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. JACKSON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Investigations and Govern-
  ment  Operations  --  committee  discharged,  bill  amended,  ordered
  reprinted as amended and recommitted to said committee
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the public officers law, in relation to requests for
  employee personnel records

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Section 87 of the public officers law is amended by adding
 a new subdivision 6 to read as follows:
  6. (A) EVERY AGENCY OR PUBLIC EMPLOYER SHALL PROVIDE WRITTEN NOTIFICA-
 TION TO AN EMPLOYEE THAT A  REQUEST  FOR  INFORMATION  PURSUANT  TO  THE
 PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE SEEKING SUCH EMPLOYEE'S PERSONNEL RECORDS HAS
 BEEN  APPROVED.  THE  NOTIFICATION  SHALL  LIST ANY DOCUMENTS REQUESTED,
 PROVIDED, OR COPIED FOR DISSEMINATION OR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
  (B) UPON OFFICIAL NOTIFICATION FROM THE EMPLOYER THAT  A  REQUEST  FOR
 INFORMATION  PURSUANT  TO  THE  PROVISIONS  OF THIS ARTICLE SEEKING SUCH
 EMPLOYEE'S PERSONNEL RECORDS HAS BEEN APPROVED, SUCH EMPLOYEE  SHALL  BE
 GIVEN  THE ABILITY TO INSPECT THEIR PERSONNEL FILE OR ANY OTHER DOCUMENT
 REFERENCING THE EMPLOYEE  AS  PART  OF  THE  INFORMATION  REQUEST.  THIS
 SECTION  SHALL  NOT  BE  A RESTRICTION TO AN EMPLOYEE'S RIGHT TO INSPECT
 THEIR PERSONNEL FILE PURSUANT TO A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING  AGREEMENT,  OR
 OTHER LAW.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect on the thirtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14454-03-4