# Increases the handling fee paid to dealers or operators of a redemption center

**Bill ID:** S8520
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Luis R. Sepúlveda
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8520 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8520)

## Summary

Increases the handling fee paid to dealers or operators of a redemption center for the redemption of empty beverage containers.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8520
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 8, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. SEPULVEDA -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the environmental conservation law, in relation to the
  handling fee paid to a dealer or operator of a redemption  center  for
  the redemption of empty beverage containers

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Subdivision 6  of  section  27-1007  of  the  environmental
 conservation  law, as added by section 4 of part SS of chapter 59 of the
 laws of 2009, is amended to read as follows:
  6. In addition to the refund value of a beverage container  as  estab-
 lished  by  section 27-1005 of this title, a deposit initiator shall pay
 to any dealer or operator of a redemption center a handling fee of three
 and one-half cents for each beverage container accepted by  the  deposit
 initiator from such dealer or operator of a redemption center. BEGINNING
 APRIL  FIRST,  TWO  THOUSAND  TWENTY-FOUR,  THE HANDLING FEE WILL BE SIX
 CENTS. Payment of the handling fee shall be as compensation for collect-
 ing, sorting and packaging of empty beverage  containers  for  transport
 back  to  the deposit initiator or its designee. Payment of the handling
 fee may not be conditioned on the purchase of any goods or services, nor
 may such payment be made out of the  refund  value  account  established
 pursuant  to  section  27-1012 of this title. A distributor who does not
 initiate deposits on a type of beverage container is considered a dealer
 only for the purpose of receiving a handling fee from a  deposit  initi-
 ator.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13958-01-4