# Relates to the reporting by the office of fire prevention and control

**Bill ID:** S8574
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Jackson
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8574 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8574)

## Summary

Requires reporting of statewide training hours allocated to each firefighter; requires such report shall identify the fire department or district providing the training.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8574
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 15, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. JACKSON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Finance
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law,  in  relation  to  reporting  by  the
  office of fire prevention and control
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Subdivision 17 of section 156  of  the  executive  law,  as
 added by chapter 615 of the laws of 2006, is amended to read as follows:
  17.  Issue  a  written  report  to the governor and legislature, on or
 before February fifteenth of each year, on firefighter  training  activ-
 ities.  Such  report shall include at least the following information:
 the minimum training hours allocated on a  county-by-county  basis,  the
 training  hours  requested by each county, any unfulfilled training hour
 requests, [and] the number of hours used by each county on a  county-by-
 county  basis, AND A STATEWIDE TOTAL OF THE NUMBER OF HOURS ALLOCATED TO
 EACH FIREFIGHTER. SUCH REPORT SHALL ALSO IDENTIFY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT OR
 DISTRICT PROVIDING THE TRAINING INCLUDING THE NUMBER OF HOURS OF  TRAIN-
 ING  AND  THE  TYPE  OF TRAINING FOR EACH FIREFIGHTER. IN ADDITION, SUCH
 REPORT SHALL ALSO LIST THE NAMES OF THOSE FIREFIGHTERS QUALIFIED  TO  DO
 INTERIOR FIREFIGHTING. THE WRITTEN REPORT SHALL BE PROMINENTLY POSTED ON
 THE  DIVISION  OF  HOMELAND  SECURITY  AND EMERGENCY SERVICES WEBSITE NO
 LATER THAN MARCH FIRST OF EACH YEAR.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14565-01-4