# Enacts the New York state antisemitism vandalism act

**Bill ID:** S8625
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jack M. Martins
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8625 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8625)

## Summary

Enacts the New York state antisemitism vandalism act which establishes the crime of vandalism of pro-Israel print, which provides a class A misdemeanor for any individual who intentionally destroys, damages, removes, or causes to be destroyed, damaged or removed any banner, poster, flyer or billboard which is located in a public space, where the intent or purpose of such banner, poster, flyer or billboard is to bring awareness for Israeli individuals who have been victims of a crime, or to positively support the country or citizens of Israel in any way.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8625
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 22, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. MARTINS, CANZONERI-FITZPATRICK, GRIFFO, OBERACKER,
  WEBER -- read twice and  ordered  printed,  and  when  printed  to  be
  committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the penal law, in relation to enacting the "New York
  state antisemitism vandalism act"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  This act shall be known and may be cited as the "New York
 state antisemitism vandalism act".
  ยง 2. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 240.80  to  read
 as follows:
 ยง 240.80 VANDALISM OF PRO-ISRAEL PRINT.
  A  PERSON  IS  GUILTY  OF VANDALISM OF PRO-ISRAEL PRINT WHEN HE OR SHE
 INTENTIONALLY DESTROYS, DAMAGES, REMOVES, OR  CAUSES  TO  BE  DESTROYED,
 DAMAGED  OR  REMOVED  ANY  BANNER,  POSTER,  FLYER OR BILLBOARD WHICH IS
 LOCATED IN A PUBLIC SPACE, WHERE THE INTENT OR PURPOSE OF  SUCH  BANNER,
 POSTER, FLYER OR BILLBOARD IS TO BRING AWARENESS FOR ISRAELI INDIVIDUALS
 WHO  HAVE  BEEN VICTIMS OF A CRIME, OR TO POSITIVELY SUPPORT THE COUNTRY
 OR CITIZENS OF ISRAEL IN ANY WAY.
  VANDALISM OF PRO-ISRAEL PRINT IS A CLASS A MISDEMEANOR.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13645-01-3