# Relates to health care proxy information and palliative care patients

**Bill ID:** S8632AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Brad Hoylman-Sigal
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S8632AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8632AA)

## Summary

Requires health care practitioners to offer health care proxy information to palliative care patients.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8632--A
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 23, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HOYLMAN-SIGAL -- read twice and ordered printed, and
  when printed to be committed to the Committee on Health  --  committee
  discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted
  to said committee
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the public health law, in relation to providing health
  care proxy information to palliative care patients

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Paragraph  (b)  of subdivision 2 of section 2997-c of the
 public health law, as amended by chapter 256 of the  laws  of  2012,  is
 amended and a new paragraph (c) is added to read as follows:
  (b)  information  regarding other appropriate treatment options should
 the patient wish to initiate or continue treatment. The information  and
 counseling may be provided orally or in writing. Where the patient lacks
 capacity  to reasonably understand and make informed choices relating to
 palliative care, the attending health care  practitioner  shall  provide
 information and counseling under this section to a person with authority
 to make health care decisions for the patient. The attending health care
 practitioner  may  arrange  for  information  and  counseling under this
 section  to  be  provided  by  another  professionally  qualified
 individual[.], AND
  (C)  INFORMATION  AND  COUNSELING  REGARDING  BENEFITS OF COMPLETING A
 HEALTH CARE PROXY AND APPOINTING A HEALTH CARE  AGENT.  A  COPY  OF  THE
 NEWLY  COMPLETED OR EXISTING HEALTH CARE PROXY SHALL BE REQUESTED BY THE
 HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER AND  MADE  A  PART  OF  THE  PATIENT'S  MEDICAL
 RECORD.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD10636-03-4