# Relates to electronic appearances for parking violations

**Bill ID:** S8672
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John Liu
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8672 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8672)

## Summary

Provides that persons charged with a parking violation shall be able to make an electronic court appearance.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8672
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 28, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  LIU  --  read  twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation  to  electronic
  appearances for parking violations
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 237 of the vehicle and traffic law  is  amended  by
 adding a new subdivision 3-a to read as follows:
  3-A. TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS PRESCRIBING ELECTRONIC APPEARANCES
 AT HEARINGS ADJUDICATING PARKING VIOLATIONS;
  ยง 2. Section 240 of the vehicle and traffic law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 3 to read as follows:
  3.  PARKING  VIOLATIONS. A PERSON CHARGED WITH A PARKING VIOLATION MAY
 ENTER A PLEA OF NOT GUILTY, PERSONALLY OR THROUGH AN  AUTHORIZED  REPRE-
 SENTATIVE,  TO  OBTAIN  A HEARING EITHER IN PERSON OR THROUGH ELECTRONIC
 APPEARANCE. SUCH PLEA MAY BE ENTERED IN PERSON AT ANY PARKING VIOLATIONS
 BUREAU OFFICE, VIA FIRST-CLASS MAIL OR ELECTRONICALLY  ON  THE  BUREAU'S
 WEBSITE. THE PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU SHALL ADVISE THE PARTY MAKING THE
 PLEA  THROUGH  FIRST CLASS MAIL OR ELECTRONICALLY THROUGH EMAIL THAT THE
 HEARING SHALL BE CONDUCTED IN THE MANNER SELECTED BY THE  RESPONDENT  OR
 THEIR  AUTHORIZED  REPRESENTATIVE.  IN  ALL  INSTANCES,  THE  PARKING
 VIOLATIONS BUREAU SHALL PERMIT THE ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION  OF  DOCUMENTA-
 TION  AND  EVIDENCE  FOR  ALL  HEARINGS, ADJOURNMENT REQUESTS, AND OTHER
 REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION UP UNTIL THE DATE AND TIME  OF  SUCH  SCHEDULED
 HEARING,  AND SUCH SUBMISSIONS SHALL CONSTITUTE A PERMANENT RECORD TO BE
 MAINTAINED BY THE PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU FOR A MINIMUM OF EIGHT YEARS
 AND THREE MONTHS. ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC NOTARIES SHALL  BE
 TREATED IN THE SAME MANNER AS PRINTED MATERIAL AND PHYSICAL FILINGS BY A
 RESPONDENT OR THEIR AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OR LEGAL COUNSEL SHALL NOT
 BE REQUIRED. A VIDEO RECORDING  SHALL BE MADE CONTEMPORANEOUSLY WITH ANY
 ELECTRONIC  APPEARANCE  OR HEARING  AND MAY BE INTRODUCED AS EVIDENCE IN
 ANY FUTURE PROCEEDINGS RELATING TO SUCH VIOLATION.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13827-02-4