# Requires all municipalities to update all applicable forms and data systems to include a gender "x" option

**Bill ID:** S8680A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Brad Hoylman-Sigal
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8680A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8680A)

## Summary

Requires all municipalities to update all applicable forms and data systems to include a gender "x" option.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8680
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  February 28, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HOYLMAN-SIGAL -- read twice and ordered printed, and
  when printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the civil rights law, in relation to requiring all muni-
  cipalities to update all applicable forms and data systems to  include
  a gender "x" option
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  The civil rights law is amended by adding  a  new  section
 79-r to read as follows:
  ยง 79-R. COLLECTION OF GENDER OR SEX DESIGNATION INFORMATION BY MUNICI-
 PALITIES.  1. ALL NEW YORK STATE MUNICIPALITIES THAT COLLECT DEMOGRAPHIC
 INFORMATION ABOUT A PERSON'S GENDER OR SEX SHALL MAKE AVAILABLE  TO  THE
 PERSON AT THE POINT OF DATA COLLECTION AN OPTION TO MARK THEIR GENDER OR
 SEX AS "X".
  2.  ALL MUNICIPALITIES SHALL UPDATE ANY APPLICABLE PHYSICAL AND ONLINE
 FORMS OR DATA SYSTEMS BY JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-SIX.
  3. A MUNICIPALITY THAT CANNOT COMPLY WITH  THE  REQUIREMENTS  OF  THIS
 SECTION  SHALL, AT LEAST SIXTY DAYS BEFORE THE APPLICABLE DEADLINE, POST
 PUBLICLY ON ITS WEBSITE A WRITTEN PROGRESS REPORT  THAT  DESCRIBES  WITH
 SPECIFICITY  THE  STEPS  THE  MUNICIPALITY HAS TAKEN TO COMPLY WITH THIS
 SECTION, THE IMPEDIMENTS THAT PREVENTED  COMPLIANCE,  AND  AN  ESTIMATED
 TIME  FRAME  FOR  COMPLIANCE. SUCH WRITTEN REPORT SHALL BE UPDATED EVERY
 SIX MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF THE ORIGINAL POSTING.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13246-06-4