# Establishes a hunting mentorship program

**Bill ID:** S8737
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Peter Oberacker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8737 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8737)

## Summary

Allows a person who is at least ten years of age to hunt small game, fowl, deer or bear during applicable seasons without obtaining a hunting license or hunter's education course certification and to possess or control a firearm if the person is within arm's reach of a qualified hunting mentor.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8737
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 5, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. OBERACKER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  environmental  conservation law, in relation to
  establishing a hunting mentorship program
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  The environmental conservation law is amended by adding a
 new section 11-0936 to read as follows:
 ยง 11-0936. HUNTING MENTORSHIP PROGRAM.
  1. AS USED IN THIS SECTION, "QUALIFIED  HUNTING  MENTOR"  OR  "MENTOR"
 MEANS A PERSON WHO SATISFIES ALL OF THE FOLLOWING REQUIREMENTS:
  (A) THE PERSON IS TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER;
  (B) THE PERSON HOLDS BOTH A VALID CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION OF A HUNT-
 ERS' EDUCATION COURSE AND A CURRENT VALID HUNTING LICENSE;
  (C)  THE  PERSON IS THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN OF THE PERSON FOR WHOM THEY
 ARE SERVING AS A MENTOR OR IS AUTHORIZED BY THE PARENT  OR  GUARDIAN  TO
 SERVE  AS  A  MENTOR; PROVIDED THAT THIS REQUIREMENT DOES NOT APPLY TO A
 PERSON SERVING AS A MENTOR FOR A PERSON WHO IS TWENTY-ONE YEARS  OF  AGE
 OR OLDER; AND
  (D)  AT  ALL  TIMES  WHEN  SERVING  AS A QUALIFIED HUNTING MENTOR, THE
 PERSON IS WITHIN ARM'S REACH OF THE PERSON FOR WHOM THEY ARE SERVING  AS
 A MENTOR.
  2.  A  PERSON  WHO  IS  AT LEAST TEN YEARS OF AGE MAY HUNT SMALL GAME,
 FOWL, DEER OR BEAR IN  THIS  STATE  DURING  APPLICABLE  SEASONS  WITHOUT
 OBTAINING  A  HUNTING LICENSE OR HUNTER'S EDUCATION COURSE CERTIFICATION
 AND MAY, WHILE HUNTING, POSSESS OR CONTROL A FIREARM  IF  AT  ALL  TIMES
 WHEN  HUNTING,  THE  PERSON IS WITHIN ARM'S REACH OF A QUALIFIED HUNTING
 MENTOR.
  3. A PERSON WHO IS AUTHORIZED TO HUNT WITH A MENTOR UNDER THIS SECTION
 AND A MENTOR UNDER THIS SECTION WITH WHOM THAT PERSON HUNTS MAY  JOINTLY
 HAVE  ONLY  ONE  FIREARM,  ONLY ONE BOW, OR, IF HUNTING WITH A CROSSBOW,
 ONLY ONE CROSSBOW IN THEIR POSSESSION OR CONTROL WHILE HUNTING.
  4. A QUALIFIED HUNTING MENTOR MAY SERVE AS A MENTOR UNDER THIS SECTION
 FOR ONLY ONE PERSON AT A TIME ON ANY HUNTING TRIP.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14550-01-4