# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Sergeant James S. Hayes Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** S8798AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Thomas F. O'Mara
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8798AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8798AA)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system constituting a portion of state route 14 as the "Sergeant James S. Hayes Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8798--A
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 12, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  O'MARA -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation --  commit-
  tee  discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recom-
  mitted to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the  "Sergeant  James  S.  Hayes  Memorial
  Highway"

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-p to
 read as follows:
  ยง 344-P. PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED  AS  THE
 "SERGEANT  JAMES  S.  HAYES  MEMORIAL  HIGHWAY". ALL THAT PORTION OF THE
 STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM CONSTITUTING STATE ROUTE 14 BEGINNING AT THE INTER-
 SECTION OF STATE ROUTE 14 AND PLUM POINT ROAD IN THE TOWN OF MILO, COUN-
 TY OF YATES, CONTINUING IN A GENERALLY NORTHERLY DIRECTION,  AND  TERMI-
 NATING  AT  THE  INTERSECTION OF STATE ROUTE 14 AND STATE ROUTE 54, ALSO
 KNOWN AS MAIN STREET, IN THE VILLAGE OF DRESDEN, COUNTY OF YATES,  SHALL
 BE  DESIGNATED  AND KNOWN AS THE "SERGEANT JAMES S. HAYES MEMORIAL HIGH-
 WAY".
  ยง 2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the  instal-
 lation  and  maintenance of adequate signing of the state highway system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this  act.  However,  to  avoid
 confusion  and  to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the desig-
 nation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall  be  one  of
 ceremonial  nature  and  the  official name of such highway shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14041-04-4