# Relates to requiring the installation of vaping detectors in certain schools

**Bill ID:** S8823
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Nathalia Fernandez
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8823 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8823)

## Summary

Requires the installation of vaping detectors in certain schools.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8823
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 18, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. FERNANDEZ -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on New York City Education
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  administrative code of the city of New York, in
  relation to requiring the installation of vaping detectors in  certain
  schools
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The administrative code of the city of New York is  amended
 by adding a new section 21-970 to read as follows:
  ยง  21-970  VAPING  DETECTORS. A. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE
 FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  1. "VAPING" SHALL MEAN THE ACT OF INHALING AND EXHALING  THE  AEROSOL,
 OFTEN REFERRED TO AS VAPOR, WHICH IS PRODUCED BY AN E-CIGARETTE OR SIMI-
 LAR DEVICE.
  2.  "VAPING  DETECTOR"  SHALL MEAN A DEVICE CAPABLE OF DETECTING VAPOR
 FROM VAPING DEVICES AND WHICH ALERTS PEOPLE TO  THE  PRESENCE  OF  VAPOR
 FROM VAPING DEVICES.
  B.  ALL SCHOOLS WITHIN THE CITY OF NEW YORK WHICH HAVE ONE THOUSAND OR
 MORE STUDENTS ENROLLED SHALL INSTALL AND MONITOR VAPING DETECTORS WITHIN
 THE SCHOOL. VAPING DETECTORS SHALL BE INSTALLED IN ALL STUDENT BATHROOMS
 AND COMMON AREAS IN SUCH SCHOOLS.
  C. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SET DISCIPLINARY MEASURES FOR STUDENTS  CAUGHT
 VAPING,  BY  MEANS  OF  A  VAPING DETECTOR OR ANY OTHER MEANS, OR CAUGHT
 TAMPERING WITH A VAPING DETECTOR. SUCH DISCIPLINARY MEASURES  SHALL  NOT
 INCLUDE SUSPENSION OR EXPULSION FROM ANY SCHOOL.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it shall have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06401-01-3