# Establishes standards for glass repair and calibration of advanced driver assistance systems

**Bill ID:** S8890
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Neil D. Breslin
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8890 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8890)

## Summary

Establishes standards for glass repair and calibration of advanced driver assistance systems for motor vehicle glass repair facilities.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8890
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 25, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. BRESLIN -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Consumer Protection
 
 AN ACT to amend the general business law, in  relation  to  establishing
  standards  for glass repair and calibration of advanced driver assist-
  ance systems
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The general business law is amended by adding a new section
 392-k to read as follows:
  ยง  392-K.  MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT; CALIBRATION AND
 RECALIBRATION OF ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE  SYSTEMS;  CONSUMER  DISCLO-
 SURE.  1. DEFINITIONS. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING
 TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING MEANINGS:
  (A) "ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM" SHALL MEAN ANY  MOTOR  VEHICLE
 ELECTRONIC  SAFETY  SYSTEM,  INCLUDING,  BUT  NOT LIMITED TO SENSORS AND
 CAMERAS, AS OUTLINED IN THE MOST RECENT PUBLICATION OF THE SAE  INTERNA-
 TIONAL'S  SAE  J3016  LEVELS  OF DRIVING AUTOMATION THAT ARE DESIGNED TO
 SUPPORT BOTH THE DRIVER AND MOTOR VEHICLE IN A MANNER INTENDED TO:
  (I) INCREASE MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY; AND
  (II) REDUCE LOSSES ASSOCIATED WITH MOTOR VEHICLE CRASHES.
  (B) "CALIBRATE" OR "RECALIBRATE" SHALL MEAN TO INSTRUCT A MOTOR  VEHI-
 CLE'S  ADVANCED  DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM, INCLUDING INTERNAL COMPUTERS,
 TO READJUST TARGETED CAMERAS, SENSORS, OR OTHER TECHNOLOGIES TO FUNCTION
 PROPERLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MOTOR VEHICLE'S MANUFACTURER  SPECIFICA-
 TIONS.
  (C)  "MOTOR  VEHICLE  GLASS  REPAIR  FACILITY"  SHALL MEAN ANY PERSON,
 INCLUDING THE PERSON'S  EMPLOYEES  AND  AGENTS  THAT  FOR  CONSIDERATION
 ENGAGES  IN THE REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED SAFETY GLASS AS DEFINED
 IN SUBDIVISION FOURTEEN OF SECTION THREE  HUNDRED  SEVENTY-FIVE  OF  THE
 VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC LAW.
  (D)  "MOTOR  VEHICLE  GLASS"  SHALL MEAN THE GLASS AND NON-GLASS PARTS
 ASSOCIATED WITH THE REPLACEMENT OF THE GLASS  USED  IN  THE  WINDSHIELD,
 DOOR OR WINDOWS AND THE GLASS, PLASTIC, OR OTHER MATERIALS USED IN VEHI-
 CLE GLASS MANUFACTURING.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14875-01-4
 S. 8890  2
 
  (E)  "REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS" SHALL MEAN
 INSPECTING, REPAIRING, RESTORING, OR  REPLACING  DAMAGED  MOTOR  VEHICLE
 GLASS  AND  CALIBRATING  OR  RECALIBRATING AN ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE
 SYSTEM WHEN AN INCIDENT REQUIRES THE REPLACEMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS.
  (F)  "SAE  J3016"  SHALL  MEAN  THE TAXONOMY AND DEFINITIONS FOR TERMS
 RELATED  TO  DRIVING  AUTOMATION  SYSTEMS  FOR  ON-ROAD  MOTOR  VEHICLES
 PUBLISHED BY SAE INTERNATIONAL IN APRIL TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-ONE.
  2. REQUIREMENTS. IF A MOTOR VEHICLE IS EQUIPPED WITH AN ADVANCED DRIV-
 ER  ASSISTANCE  SYSTEM,  A MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR SHOP THAT CONDUCTS
 SAFETY GLASS OR MOTOR VEHICLE  GLASS  REPAIR,  REPLACEMENT,  OR  RECALI-
 BRATION SHALL INFORM THE CONSUMER:
  (A)  IF  A  RECALIBRATION  OF THE ADVANCED DRIVER SYSTEM ASSISTANCE IS
 REQUIRED; AND
  (B) IF A RECALIBRATION OF THE ADVANCED  DRIVER  ASSISTANCE  SYSTEM  IS
 PERFORMED  THAT  SUCH SYSTEM SHALL MEET THE MOTOR VEHICLE'S MANUFACTURER
 SPECIFICATIONS.
  3. NOTIFICATION. (A) A  MOTOR  VEHICLE  GLASS  REPAIR  FACILITY  SHALL
 PROVIDE  TO  CONSUMERS AN ITEMIZED DESCRIPTION OF THE WORK TO BE DONE ON
 THE MOTOR VEHICLE.
  (B) A MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR FACILITY SHALL  NOT  REPRESENT  TO  A
 CONSUMER THAT THE COST OF A REPAIR, REPLACEMENT OR CALIBRATION OR RECAL-
 IBRATION  SHALL BE PAID FOR ENTIRELY BY THE CONSUMER'S INSURER AND AT NO
 COST TO THE CONSUMER UNLESS THE COST OF THE REPAIR,  REPLACEMENT,  CALI-
 BRATION  OR RECALIBRATION IS FULLY COVERED AS PROVIDED BY THE CONSUMER'S
 INSURANCE POLICY.
  (C) A MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR FACILITY SHALL NOT  CONTRACT  WITH  A
 PERSON  FOR  A  REPAIR  OR  REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED SAFETY GLASS OR MOTOR
 VEHICLE GLASS UNTIL THE MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR SHOP HAS  RECEIVED  A
 CLAIM OR REFERRAL NUMBER FOR INSURANCE COVERED DAMAGE.
  (D)  PRIOR  TO  FINALIZING A CONTRACT FOR REPAIR WITH A CONSUMER FOR A
 REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS,  A  MOTOR  VEHICLE
 GLASS REPAIR FACILITY SHALL NOTIFY SUCH CONSUMER:
  (I)  WHETHER  SUCH  MOTOR  VEHICLE  HAS  AN ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE
 SYSTEM;
  (II) WHETHER THE CALIBRATION OR RECALIBRATION OF THE  MOTOR  VEHICLE'S
 ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM IS REQUIRED TO:
  (1) MAKE THE ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM OPERABLE; AND
  (2)  ENSURE  THAT  THE  REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED MOTOR VEHICLE
 GLASS IS PERFORMED IN A MANNER THAT  MEETS  THE  VEHICLE  MANUFACTURER'S
 SPECIFICATIONS;
  (III) WHETHER THE MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR FACILITY CAN CALIBRATE OR
 RECALIBRATE THE ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM IN A MANNER THAT MEETS
 THE MOTOR VEHICLE'S MANUFACTURERS SPECIFICATIONS; AND
  (IV)  IF  THE  MOTOR  VEHICLE  GLASS REPAIR FACILITY IS NOT CAPABLE OF
 PERFORMING A CALIBRATION OR RECALIBRATION AS REFERENCED  IN  SUBDIVISION
 THREE  OF  THIS  SECTION,  THAT THE MOTOR VEHICLE SHOULD BE TAKEN TO THE
 VEHICLE'S MANUFACTURER CERTIFIED DEALERSHIP OR  A  QUALIFIED  SPECIALIST
 CAPABLE  OF  PERFORMING  THE CALIBRATION OR RECALIBRATION THAT MEETS THE
 VEHICLE'S MANUFACTURER SPECIFICATIONS.
  4. UNSUCCESSFUL RECALIBRATION. IF A RECALIBRATION WAS NOT PERFORMED OR
 NOT COMPLETED SUCCESSFULLY, THE  MOTOR  VEHICLE  GLASS  REPAIR  FACILITY
 SHALL  INFORM  THE CONSUMER AND THE CONSUMER'S INSURER ELECTRONICALLY OR
 IN WRITING  THAT  THE  RECALIBRATION  WAS  NOT  SUCCESSFUL  OR  WAS  NOT
 PERFORMED  AND  THAT  THE  MOTOR VEHICLE SHOULD BE TAKEN TO A FRANCHISED
 MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER OR A MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR FACILITY CAPABLE OF
 PERFORMING THE  CALIBRATION  OR  RECALIBRATION  OF  AN  ADVANCED  DRIVER
 S. 8890  3
 
 ASSISTANCE SYSTEM THAT MEETS THE MOTOR VEHICLE MANUFACTURER'S SPECIFICA-
 TIONS.
  5.  RECALIBRATION  REQUIREMENTS. A MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR FACILITY
 THAT CONDUCTS A CALIBRATION, RECALIBRATION OR  REPLACEMENT  ON  A  MOTOR
 VEHICLE EQUIPPED WITH AN ADVANCED DRIVER SYSTEM SHALL:
  (A)  SHALL  RECALIBRATE  THE ADVANCED DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM TO MEET
 SUCH MOTOR VEHICLE'S MANUFACTURER SPECIFICATIONS; AND
  (B) IS NOT LIMITED TO SAFETY GLASS  OR  MOTOR  VEHICLE  GLASS,  TOOLS,
 EQUIPMENT,  OR  REPAIR  PROCEDURES  DICTATED OR RECOMMENDED BY THE MOTOR
 VEHICLE MANUFACTURER TO MEET SUCH MOTOR VEHICLE'S MANUFACTURER  SPECIFI-
 CATIONS.
  6.  BILLING.  A  MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR FACILITY SHALL NOT BILL OR
 CHARGE THE CONSUMER OR THE CONSUMER'S INSURER FOR SAFETY GLASS OR  MOTOR
 VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR, REPLACEMENT, CALIBRATION OR RECALIBRATION SERVICES
 THAT  ARE  NOT PERFORMED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MOTOR VEHICLE'S MANUFAC-
 TURER SPECIFICATIONS.
  7. PENALTIES. A MOTOR VEHICLE GLASS REPAIR FACILITY THAT VIOLATES  THE
 PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE LIABLE FOR A PENALTY OF TWO THOUSAND
 FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS PER OCCURRENCE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.