# Authorizes distinctive license plates for recipients of the Bronze or Silver star

**Bill ID:** S8891
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jessica Scarcella-Spanton
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S8891 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S8891)

## Summary

Authorizes distinctive license plates for recipients of the Bronze or Silver star.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  8891
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  March 25, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. SCARCELLA-SPANTON -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in relation to  authorizing
  distinctive license plates for recipients of the Bronze or Silver star
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The vehicle and traffic law is  amended  by  adding  a  new
 section 404-ff to read as follows:
  ยง  404-FF. DISTINCTIVE PLATES FOR BRONZE OR SILVER STAR RECIPIENTS. 1.
 ANY RECIPIENT OF A BRONZE STAR OR A SILVER STAR RESIDING IN  THIS  STATE
 OR  THE  SPOUSE  OF  ANY SUCH RECIPIENT SHALL, UPON REQUEST, BE ISSUED A
 LICENSE PLATE BEARING THE WORDS "BRONZE STAR RECIPIENT" OR "SILVER  STAR
 RECIPIENT".  IF A DISTINCTIVE PLATE IS ISSUED TO A BRONZE OR SILVER STAR
 RECIPIENT  PURSUANT  TO THIS SECTION, SUCH A DISTINCTIVE PLATE SHALL NOT
 BE ISSUED TO THE SPOUSE OF SUCH RECIPIENT. APPLICATION FOR SAID  LICENSE
 PLATE  SHALL  BE  FILED WITH THE COMMISSIONER IN SUCH FORM AND DETAIL AS
 THE COMMISSIONER SHALL PRESCRIBE.
  2. THE DISTINCTIVE PLATE AUTHORIZED IN THIS SECTION  SHALL  BE  ISSUED
 UPON  PROOF, SATISFACTORY TO THE COMMISSIONER, THAT THE APPLICANT OR THE
 SPOUSE OF THE APPLICANT IS A BRONZE OR SILVER STAR RECIPIENT.
  3. A DISTINCTIVE PLATE ISSUED PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION SHALL BE ISSUED
 IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER NUMBER PLATES UPON PAYMENT  OF  THE  REGULAR
 REGISTRATION FEE PRESCRIBED BY SECTION FOUR HUNDRED ONE OF THIS ARTICLE,
 PROVIDED,  HOWEVER,  THAT  AN  ADDITIONAL ONE-TIME SERVICE CHARGE OF TEN
 DOLLARS SHALL BE CHARGED FOR SUCH PLATE.  PROVIDED, HOWEVER,  THAT  ONE
 YEAR  AFTER  THE  EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION, FUNDS IN THE AMOUNT OF
 FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS, OR SO MUCH THEREOF AS MAY BE AVAILABLE, SHALL  BE
 ALLOCATED  TO  THE  DEPARTMENT  TO  OFFSET  COSTS  ASSOCIATED  WITH  THE
 PRODUCTION OF SUCH LICENSE PLATES.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD03013-01-3