# Prohibits contracts for the purchase or financing of a dog, cat, or rabbit from including provisions allowing repossession of the animal

**Bill ID:** S9019A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michael Gianaris
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S9019A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9019A)

## Summary

Prohibits contracts for the purchase or financing of a dog, cat, or rabbit from including provisions allowing repossession of the animal; provides that such provisions apply to the sale of dogs, cats and rabbits through an online website.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9019
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 10, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. GIANARIS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Consumer Protection
 
 AN ACT to amend the general business law,  in  relation  to  prohibiting
  contracts  for the purchase or financing of a dog, cat, or rabbit from
  including provisions allowing repossession of the animal

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section  753-e  of  the general business law, as added by
 chapter 272 of the laws of 2018, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 753-e. Prohibited contracts. No contract for the purchase of  a  dog
 [or  a], cat, OR RABBIT, or the financing of such purchase shall include
 any provisions which authorize the use of a dog [or a], cat,  OR  RABBIT
 as  security  where  such dog [or], cat, OR RABBIT may be repossessed by
 the seller or lender contingent on the purchaser making  payments  under
 such contract. Provided, however, nothing in this section shall prohibit
 the purchase of a dog [or], cat, OR RABBIT through an unsecured personal
 loan,  nor  be construed to limit the enforcement of other provisions of
 this article, article [twenty-six-a] TWENTY-SIX-A of the agriculture and
 markets law or other rights or remedies which are otherwise available to
 all parties under any other law.  THE PROVISIONS OF THIS  SECTION  SHALL
 APPLY TO THE SALE OF A DOG, CAT, OR RABBIT THROUGH AN ONLINE WEBSITE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02748-03-4