# Relates to designating a portion of the state highway system in the hamlet of Uniondale as Jomani "Jo-Jo" Wright Way

**Bill ID:** S9030
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin Thomas
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9030 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9030)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system in the hamlet of Uniondale as Jomani "Jo-Jo" Wright Way.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9030
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 10, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  THOMAS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system in the hamlet of Uniondale as Jomani  "Jo-Jo"
  Wright Way
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 345-c to
 read as follows:
  ยง 345-C. PORTION OF THE STATE  HIGHWAY  SYSTEM  TO  BE  DESIGNATED  AS
 "JOMANI  "JO-JO"  WRIGHT  WAY".  ALL THAT PORTION  OF THE STATE HIGHWAY
 SYSTEM CONSTITUTING STATE ROUTE ONE HUNDRED TWO IN THE HAMLET OF  UNION-
 DALE,  COUNTY  OF  NASSAU,  BEGINNING  AT  THE INTERSECTION OF UNIONDALE
 AVENUE AND FRONT STREET AND ENDING AT THE INTERSECTION OF CHESTER STREET
 AND FRONT STREET SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS "JOMANI "JO-JO" WRIGHT
 WAY".
  ยง 2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the  instal-
 lation  and  maintenance of adequate signing of the state highway system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this  act.  However,  to  avoid
 confusion  and  to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the desig-
 nation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall  be  one  of
 ceremonial  nature  and  the  official name of such highway shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15029-02-4