# Establishes the crime of aggravated offering of a false accusation against a police officer or peace officer

**Bill ID:** S9048
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jessica Scarcella-Spanton
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9048 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9048)

## Summary

Establishes the crime of aggravated offering of a false accusation against a peace officer or police officer for knowingly reporting false or baseless information relating to wrongdoing by a police or peace officer to a law enforcement agency; creates a private right of action for damages.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9048
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 12, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. SCARCELLA-SPANTON -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law and the civil rights law, in  relation  to
  creating  the  crime  of  aggravated  offering  of  a false accusation
  against a police officer and creating a private right of action

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 240.64 to
 read as follows:
 ยง 240.64 AGGRAVATED OFFERING OF A  FALSE  ACCUSATION  AGAINST  A  POLICE
  OFFICER OR PEACE OFFICER.
  A  PERSON  IS  GUILTY  OF  AGGRAVATED  OFFERING  OF A FALSE ACCUSATION
 AGAINST A POLICE OFFICER OR PEACE OFFICER WHEN, KNOWING THE  INFORMATION
 REPORTED  TO BE FALSE OR BASELESS, HE OR SHE REPORTS, BY WORD OR ACTION,
 TO A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER OR AGENCY, WRONGDOING BY A  POLICE  OFFICER
 OR  PEACE  OFFICER  IN THE PERFORMANCE OF HIS OR HER DUTIES.  UNDER THIS
 SECTION, POLICE OFFICER AND PEACE OFFICER ARE AS DEFINED  UNDER  SECTION
 1.20 OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE LAW.
  AGGRAVATED  OFFERING OF A FALSE ACCUSATION AGAINST A POLICE OFFICER OR
 PEACE OFFICER IS CLASS D FELONY.
  ยง 2. The civil rights law is amended by adding a new section  50-g  to
 read as follows:
  ยง  50-G.  PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION; FALSE ACCUSATION.  A POLICE OFFICER
 OR PEACE OFFICER, OR HIS OR HER REPRESENTATIVE, MAY BRING AN  ACTION  TO
 RECOVER  DAMAGES  SUFFERED  BY REASON OF A FALSE ACCUSATION AGAINST SUCH
 POLICE OFFICER OR PEACE OFFICER IN VIOLATION OF SECTION  240.64  OF  THE
 PENAL LAW. IN ANY ACTION BROUGHT UNDER THIS SECTION, THE COURT MAY AWARD
 REASONABLE ATTORNEY'S FEES TO A PREVAILING PLAINTIFF.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02396-01-3