# Requires notification of an incarcerated individual's emergency contacts when such incarcerated individual attempts suicide or is hospitalized

**Bill ID:** S9056
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Sanders Jr.
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S9056 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9056)

## Summary

Requires the department of corrections and community supervision within twenty-four hours of the attempted suicide or hospitalization of an incarcerated individual or any other individual occurring in the custody of the department, to notify the emergency contacts of such incarcerated individual or other such individual.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9056
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 15, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SANDERS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Crime Victims,  Crime  and
  Correction
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the correction law, in relation to requiring notifica-
  tion of an incarcerated  individual's  emergency  contacts  when  such
  incarcerated individual attempts suicide or is hospitalized

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The correction law is amended by adding a new section 17 to
 read as follows:
  ยง 17. NOTICE TO EMERGENCY CONTACTS.  WITHIN TWENTY-FOUR HOURS  OF  THE
 ATTEMPTED  SUICIDE  OR  HOSPITALIZATION OF AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL OR
 ANY OTHER INDIVIDUAL OCCURRING IN THE CUSTODY  OF  THE  DEPARTMENT,  THE
 DEPARTMENT  SHALL  NOTIFY  THE  EMERGENCY  CONTACTS OF SUCH INCARCERATED
 INDIVIDUAL OR OTHER SUCH INDIVIDUAL.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14979-01-4