# Prohibits residential landlords from charging tenants with fees for the payment of rent through an automated clearing house or online payment system

**Bill ID:** S9070
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Jackson
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S9070 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9070)

## Summary

Prohibits residential landlords from charging tenants with fees for the payment of rent through an automated clearing house or online payment system.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9070
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 16, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. JACKSON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the real property law, in relation to prohibiting  resi-
  dential  landlords  from charging tenants with fees for the payment of
  rent through an automated clearing house or online payment system

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 235-g of the real property law, as added by chapter
 367 of the laws of 2010, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง  235-g.  Electronic  billing  and/or  payment of rent. 1. A landlord
 shall not require a lessee or tenant to use an electronic billing and/or
 payment system as the only method for the payment of  rent.  A  landlord
 shall  not  assess  any  fee or other charge for a lessee or tenant that
 chooses not to use an electronic billing and/or payment system.
  2. A LANDLORD SHALL NOT ASSESS ANY FEE OR OTHER CHARGE FOR THE USE  OF
 AN AUTOMATED CLEARING HOUSE PAYMENT FOR THE PAYMENT OF RENT.
  3.  A  LANDLORD  SHALL  PROVIDE  A  LESSEE  OR TENANT A METHOD FOR THE
 PAYMENT OF RENT THAT DOES NOT INCUR A FEE OR OTHER  CHARGE  ASSESSED  BY
 THE  LANDLORD.  THIS  METHOD  MAY  INCLUDE BUT IS NOT LIMITED TO CASH OR
 PERSONAL CHECK OF THE LESSEE OR TENANT.
  4. Any agreement by a lessee or tenant of a dwelling waiving or  modi-
 fying  [his  or  her] THEIR rights as set forth in this section shall be
 void as contrary to public policy.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14021-03-4