# Relates to microchipping of certain animals possessed by animal protective associations and rescue organizations

**Bill ID:** S9081AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin Thomas
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9081AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9081AA)

## Summary

Permits microchipping of certain animals possessed by animal protective associations and rescue organizations.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9081--A
  Cal. No. 1458
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 16, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  THOMAS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on  Agriculture  --  reported
  favorably  from  said  committee,  ordered to first and second report,
  amended on second report, ordered  to  a  third  reading,  and  to  be
  reprinted  as amended, retaining its place in the order of third read-
  ing

 AN ACT to amend the agriculture and markets law, in relation  to  micro-
  chipping of certain animals
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The agriculture and markets law is amended by adding a  new
 section 386 to read as follows:
  ยง 386. MICROCHIPPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS. ANY DULY INCORPORATED SOCIETY
 FOR THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS, DULY INCORPORATED HUMANE SOCI-
 ETY,  DULY  INCORPORATED  ANIMAL  PROTECTIVE  ASSOCIATION  OR OTHER DULY
 INCORPORATED ANIMAL ADOPTION OR ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION OR  MUNICIPAL
 SHELTER  DEDICATED  TO  THE  CARE  OF  UNWANTED ANIMALS WHICH MAKES SUCH
 ANIMALS AVAILABLE FOR ADOPTION WHETHER OR NOT A FEE FOR SUCH ADOPTION IS
 CHARGED  THAT  IS  EXEMPT  FROM  TAXES  PURSUANT  TO  PARAGRAPH  (3)  OF
 SUBSECTION  (C)  OF SECTION 501 OF THE FEDERAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE, 26
 U.S.C. 501, OR ANY SUBSEQUENT  CORRESPONDING  SECTIONS  OF  THE  FEDERAL
 INTERNAL  REVENUE CODE, AS FROM TIME TO TIME AMENDED, THAT IS REGISTERED
 WITH THE DEPARTMENT MAY IMPLANT OR CAUSE TO BE IMPLANTED A MICROCHIP  IN
 ANY DOG OR CAT IN THE POSSESSION OF SUCH ORGANIZATION UNLESS SUCH ANIMAL
 IS  DETERMINED  TO  HAVE AN EXISTING MICROCHIP. SUCH ORGANIZATIONS SHALL
 MAKE BEST EFFORTS TO UPDATE THE CONTACT INFORMATION ASSOCIATED WITH EACH
 IMPLANTED OR EXISTING MICROCHIP,  THIS  INCLUDES:  (A)  IDENTIFYING  THE
 ORGANIZATION  LAST  HAVING  POSSESSION  OF THE ANIMAL, (B) ANY PERSON TO
 WHOM POSSESSION IS TRANSFERRED THROUGH ADOPTION FROM SUCH  ORGANIZATION,
 AND  (C) FOR LOST AND FOUND ANIMALS THE MOST ACCURATE AND UPDATED INFOR-
 MATION OF THE CURRENT OWNER.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15185-06-4