# Relates to informational notices provided on utility bills

**Bill ID:** S9087
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Patricia Canzoneri-Fitzpatrick
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9087 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9087)

## Summary

Requires the public service commission to determine the cost to ratepayers of rules and regulations issued to comply with the New York state climate leadership and community protection act.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9087
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 22, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CANZONERI-FITZPATRICK  --  read  twice and ordered
  printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee  on  Energy
  and Telecommunications
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the public service law, in relation to informational
  notices provided on utility bills relating to compliance with the  New
  York state climate leadership and community protection act

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Short title. This act shall be known and may  be  cited  as
 the "CLCPA transparency act".
  ยง  2.  Section 44 of the public service law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 8 to read as follows:
  8. (A) THE COMMISSION SHALL DEVELOP A FORMULA TO DETERMINE  THE  COST,
 ON  A  PER  RATEPAYER  BASIS, TO COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN
 ARTICLE SEVENTY-FIVE OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION LAW, OR ANY OTHER
 RULE OR REGULATION PROMULGATED BY A STATE AGENCY PRIOR TO THE  EFFECTIVE
 DATE  OF THIS SUBDIVISION, OR ANY SUBSEQUENT ACTION TAKEN THEREAFTER, TO
 MEET THE EMISSIONS GOALS SET FORTH BY SUCH ARTICLE SEVENTY-FIVE.
  (B) BEGINNING MARCH FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE, AT  LEAST  THIRTY
 DAYS  PRIOR  TO  ISSUING  ANY  ORDER, DIRECTIVE, RULE, OR REGULATION THE
 COMMISSION SHALL DISCLOSE TO THE PUBLIC THROUGH PUBLIC NOTICE AND ON THE
 COMMISSION'S WEBSITE THE COST, AS DETERMINED BY THE FORMULA DEVELOPED BY
 THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO PARAGRAPH (A) OF  THIS  SUBDIVISION,  OF  ANY
 ORDER, DIRECTIVE, RULE, OR REGULATION ISSUED BY THE COMMISSION TO COMPLY
 WITH  ANY PROVISION OF ARTICLE SEVENTY-FIVE OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL CONSER-
 VATION LAW.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14955-01-4