# Relates to labeling requirements for gas stoves

**Bill ID:** S9105BA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Liz Krueger
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9105BA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9105BA)

## Summary

Requires the display of certain labels and warnings on gas stoves sold, displayed for sale, or offered for sale at retail to a consumer in this state; authorizes the department of state to adopt regulations regarding the placement and format of such labels; provides for penalties; authorizes the attorney general to enforce such provisions.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9105--A
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 26, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  KRUEGER, CHU, CLEARE, COONEY, GONZALEZ, HARCKHAM,
  HOYLMAN-SIGAL, MAY, RIVERA, SALAZAR, SANDERS, STAVISKY,  THOMAS,  WEBB
  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when printed to be committed to
  the  Committee  on  Consumer  Protection -- committee discharged, bill
  amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted to said  commit-
  tee

 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  general  business  law, in relation to labeling
  requirements for gas stoves
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Short  title. This act shall be known and may be cited as
 the "Healthy Homes Right To Know Act".
  ยง 2. Legislative findings. The legislature finds and declares that:
  1. New York has a long history of protecting its  citizens  by  making
 sure they have adequate knowledge to make informed purchasing decisions.
  2.  The  public  is broadly unaware of the health dangers posed by gas
 stoves. On May 8, 2023,  ten  state  attorneys  general,  including  the
 attorney  general  of New York State as well as the New York City Corpo-
 ration Counsel, sent a letter to the Consumer Product Safety  Commission
 (CPSC),  in  which  they asserted, "Most of the research and evidence on
 the health risks associated with elevated levels of emissions  from  gas
 appliances  has  been circulated among decisionmakers and engaged stake-
 holders. This has left the public to try to piece  together  health  and
 safety information--which can be false or misleading--from the internet,
 social  media,  and other non-authoritative sources. Thus, when it comes
 to gas stove emissions, consumers are presently unprotected against, and
 inadequately informed about, the health hazards these appliances  pose."
 Those  dangers  may  now be particularly acute as, according to the U.S.
 Environmental Protection Agency, "Americans on average,  spend  approxi-
 mately 90% of their time indoors where concentrations of some pollutants
 are often 2 to 5 times higher than typical outdoor concentrations."
  3.  The  same letter suggests, "requiring warning labels on gas stoves
 that provide more information on their health risks". The letter goes on
 to say, "Proper labeling on gas stoves would represent an important step
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14481-04-4
 S. 9105--A  2
 
 in helping to educate consumers about the health risks  associated  with
 gas  stoves. Providing this information upfront is essential to enabling
 consumers to make a fully informed decision."
  4.  Current  New  York state regulations regarding unvented gas appli-
 ances are inconsistent. Since there is no statewide requirement that gas
 stoves be ventilated to the outdoors, a precautionary approach to public
 safety requires that these appliances be treated as unvented.
  5. Although the research regarding the impacts of unvented gas heaters
 is vastly less robust than that regarding gas stoves, the New York State
 Department of Health nonetheless adopted regulations in January of  2023
 to  require  labeling  of unvented gas heaters including, "WARNING: This
 appliance produces CARBON MONOXIDE, a poisonous gas. You MUST use carbon
 monoxide alarms to avoid injury or  death".  Labeling  requirements  for
 unvented  heaters  in  California  also include warnings of exposure to:
 "...chemicals including benzene, which is known to the state of Califor-
 nia to cause cancer and cause birth defects or other reproductive harm".
  6. Given that the research regarding gas stoves is even more  complete
 and  compelling,  New York State should also act to inform the public as
 has already been done with unvented gas heaters.
  7. The scientific consensus on gas stove emissions is robust and grow-
 ing.  It is now understood that gas  stoves  can  emit  carbon  monoxide
 (CO),  nitrogen  dioxide (NO2), benzene, and formaldehyde. Methane emis-
 sions can occur even when the gas stove is turned off. According to  the
 Concerned Health Professionals of New York and the Physicians for Social
 Responsibility,  "Nearly  three-quarters  of  methane emissions from gas
 stoves take place while the stove is turned off and not in use.  At  the
 same  time  levels  of hazardous air pollutants from everyday use of gas
 stoves often exceed the limits of outdoor air quality standards.  Indoor
 concentrations  are  often much higher than health-protective guidelines
 set by the World Health Organization."
  8. According to  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,
 "Carbon  monoxide,  or "CO," is an odorless, colorless gas that can kill
 you". The New York State Department of Health refers to carbon  monoxide
 as  a  poisonous gas. Approximately 430 people die each year from carbon
 monoxide exposure. Thousands more become ill and seek medical attention.
 Carbon monoxide poisoning is estimated to cause more than  50,000  emer-
 gency  room  visits in the United States each year. According to the New
 York State Department of Health, annually, "In New York State, about 200
 people are hospitalized and over 1800 people visit an emergency  depart-
 ment  because  of  accidental  CO  poisoning." The numbers of accidental
 poisonings are on the rise. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety  Commission
 "found  evidence of a statistically significant upward trend in non-fire
 CO deaths for the 11-year  period  from  2009  to  2019".  According  to
 Preventative  Medicine  reports, "Accidental, non-fire related poisoning
 accounts for over $1.3 billion annually in societal costs."
  9. Notably, while carbon monoxide alarms are an important preventative
 measure to lower the risk of carbon monoxide  poisoning,  they  are  not
 guaranteed  to  be  effective. According to the National Carbon Monoxide
 Awareness Association: "Only 14% of families in the US have  a  properly
 functioning  carbon  monoxide  alarm".  An earlier report showed that in
 2009, 83% of NYC residents reported having CO alarms. However, only  54%
 of them had recently tested or replaced their batteries.
  10.  Nitrogen  dioxide, or NO2, is a gaseous air pollutant composed of
 nitrogen and oxygen and is formed when fossil fuels are burned. The  EPA
 has  determined that NO2 is "causal" of more severe respiratory symptoms
 in people with asthma and that long-term  exposure  to  NO2  is  "likely
 S. 9105--A  3
 
 causal" of respiratory illnesses such as asthma. The New England Journal
 of  Medicine  has  found  that,  "Gas  combustion in stoves, boilers and
 furnaces generates oxides of nitrogen," to which the article attributes,
 "Increased  asthma  risk;  exacerbation  of  COPD  and  cardiovascular
 disease".  The EPA includes NO2 on its  list  of  asthma  triggers,  and
 "unvented  combustion  appliances, e.g. gas stoves" is first on its list
 of "primary sources of NO2 indoors".
  11. Each year, asthma accounts for more than 439,000 hospitalizations,
 1.6 million emergency department  visits,  and  10.5  million  physician
 office visits in the United States. About 10 people die from the disease
 every day. Asthma has been linked to 13.8 million missed school days and
 14.2  million  missed  workdays annually. The cost of treating asthma in
 the United States is $62.8 billion every year.
  12. A 2013 meta-analysis of 41 studies found that children  living  in
 homes with gas stoves had a 42 percent higher risk of experiencing asth-
 ma symptoms, and, over their lifetime, a 24 percent increase in the risk
 of  being diagnosed with asthma, and a 2022 peer-reviewed research paper
 published in the International Journal  of  Environmental  Research  and
 Public Health found that more than 12% of current childhood asthma cases
 in  the  US  can be attributed to gas stove use. The same paper suggests
 that attribution number is 18.8% of children with  asthma  in  New  York
 State.
  13.  The  asthma  crisis does not equally affect all New York communi-
 ties.  Black Americans are approximately two times more likely to die of
 asthma than White Americans. Further, the percentage of  Black  children
 in  the  U.S.  suffering from asthma is nearly twice that of White chil-
 dren, and their death rate is ten times  higher.  According  to  a  2023
 joint  report  from  the New York State Department of Health and the New
 York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, "The burden of asthma
 falls disproportionately among specific demographic groups, specifically
 for persons and communities of color, where asthma prevalence is  higher
 among  Black, American Indian, and multiracial New Yorkers." The Centers
 for Disease Control  and  Prevention  concurs  with  the  assessment  of
 disproportionate burden.
  14.  While the age-adjusted asthma mortality rate for New York City is
 higher than for New York State as a whole, with the Bronx  demonstrating
 a  notably  higher  mortality rate than the other boroughs, this problem
 should not be construed as a New York City issue. Other  hotspots  exist
 around  the  state. For example, years of academic research has convinc-
 ingly demonstrated alarmingly high rates of  asthma  on  Buffalo's  West
 Side.  A  study  by  Dr.  Lwebuga-Mukasa,  Professor  of Medicine at the
 University of Buffalo, found that "nearly 45% of  West  Side  households
 reported at least one case of chronic respiratory illness or asthma".
  15.  Gas and propane combustion from gas stoves emits benzene. A study
 from the Stanford Woods Institute  for  the  Environment  found  that  a
 single  gas  cooktop  burner  set on high, or an oven set at 350 degrees
 Fahrenheit can, "raise indoor levels of  the  carcinogen  benzene  above
 those  of secondhand smoke". According to the World Health Organization,
 "Human exposure to benzene has been associated with a range of acute and
 long-term adverse health effects  and  diseases,  including  cancer  and
 haematological effects."
  16. Formaldehyde is listed as a human carcinogen and has been found at
 more elevated levels associated with gas burners set to "simmer".
  17.  Ventilation  of  gas  stove emissions to the outdoors can improve
 indoor air quality. However, many homeowners do  not  have  ventilation,
 and it is not required by state law. In addition, studies also show that
 S. 9105--A  4
 
 many  people  who have ventilation systems don't use them, often because
 of noise concerns. Vents can become blocked with debris and  the  effec-
 tiveness  of  ventilation  systems  can be compromised by changes in air
 pressure  in  the  building envelope caused by the opening of windows or
 doors or the activation of bathroom  fans,  for  example.  Lastly,  some
 people with range hoods may be under the mistaken belief that pollutants
 are being vented outdoors when in fact many hoods simply recirculate the
 air into the kitchen after filtering it. The effectiveness of filtration
 varies  widely  and  is  partially  based  on  active maintenance of the
 filtration system.
  18. Therefore it is the intent of the legislature  to  promote  public
 health,  support  informed consumer choice, and create consistent public
 policy, by requiring labeling and signage regarding the  health  impacts
 of gas stoves.
  ยง 3. The general business law is amended by adding a new section 322-d
 to read as follows:
  ยง  322-D. LABELING REQUIREMENTS FOR GAS STOVES. 1. FOR THE PURPOSES OF
 THIS SECTION, "GAS STOVE" MEANS A STOVE OR RANGE THAT  UTILIZES  NATURAL
 GAS OR PROPANE AND IS USED FOR FOOD PREPARATION, WHETHER IN A COMMERCIAL
 OR RESIDENTIAL SETTING, AND PROVIDES AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING FUNC-
 TIONS:
  (A) SURFACE COOKING;
  (B) OVEN COOKING; OR
  (C) BROILING.
  2.  NO  PERSON,  FIRM,  PARTNERSHIP, ASSOCIATION, OR CORPORATION SHALL
 SELL OR OFFER FOR SALE TO A CONSUMER IN THIS STATE ANY GAS STOVE  UNLESS
 THE FOLLOWING REQUIREMENTS ARE MET:
  (A)  A  REMOVABLE  LABEL  IS AFFIXED TO THE GAS STOVE IF SUCH STOVE IS
 DISPLAYED FOR SALE OUTSIDE OF A PACKAGE, OR THE PACKAGE IN WHICH  IT  IS
 CONTAINED,  WITH  A TYPE SIZE NO SMALLER THAN THE LARGEST TYPE SIZE USED
 FOR OTHER CONSUMER INFORMATION ON THE PRODUCT OR PACKAGE, IS IN A PROMI-
 NENT LOCATION, AND BEARS THE FOLLOWING MESSAGE:
  "WARNING: GAS STOVES CAN RELEASE NITROGEN DIOXIDE AND CARBON  MONOXIDE
  (A POISONOUS GAS) INSIDE HOMES AT LEVELS EXCEEDING THE EPA'S STANDARDS
  FOR  OUTDOOR AIR QUALITY. THE PRESENCE OF THESE POLLUTANTS MAY EXACER-
  BATE PRE-EXISTING RESPIRATORY ILLNESSES OR LEAD TO THE DEVELOPMENT  OF
  ASTHMA,  ESPECIALLY  IN  CHILDREN.  GAS  STOVES MAY ALSO RELEASE OTHER
  POLLUTANTS INCLUDING BENZENE, AND FORMALDEHYDE."
  (B) (I) A SIGN OR POSTER SHALL BE DISPLAYED CONSPICUOUSLY AT THE PREM-
 ISES ON WHICH THE SALE TAKES PLACE BEARING THE MESSAGE REQUIRED BY PARA-
 GRAPH (A) OF THIS SUBDIVISION. SUCH SIGN OR POSTER MUST HAVE CONSPICUOUS
 LETTERING IN AT LEAST SEVENTY-TWO POINT BOLD FACE TYPE, EXCEPT THAT  THE
 WORD  "WARNING"  SHALL  BE  IN AT LEAST TWO-INCH LETTERING. SUCH SIGN OR
 POSTER SHALL BE PLACED AS CLOSE AS  POSSIBLE  TO  THE  PLACE  WHERE  GAS
 STOVES  ARE DISPLAYED FOR SALE SO THAT IT IS NOTICEABLE AND EASILY READ-
 ABLE BY A CONSUMER EXAMINING ANY DISPLAYED GAS STOVES FOR SALE.
  (II) IF THE SALE TAKES PLACE ON THE INTERNET, A NOTICE SHALL BE POSTED
 IN A CONSPICUOUS LOCATION ON THE WEB PAGE ON  WHICH  THE  GAS  STOVE  IS
 LISTED  FOR  SALE, BEARING THE MESSAGE REQUIRED BY PARAGRAPH (A) OF THIS
 SUBDIVISION.
  3. THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS REGARDING THE  PLACE-
 MENT  AND  FORMAT  OF  LABELS,  SIGNS,  AND  POSTERS TO COMPLY WITH THIS
 SECTION.
  4. ANY PERSON WHO VIOLATES ANY PROVISION OF THIS SECTION SHALL RECEIVE
 A WARNING NOTICE FOR THE FIRST SUCH VIOLATION. A PERSON SHALL BE  LIABLE
 TO  THE  STATE OF NEW YORK FOR A CIVIL PENALTY NOT TO EXCEED TWO HUNDRED
 S. 9105--A  5
 
 FIFTY DOLLARS FOR THE SECOND VIOLATION AND ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR  ANY
 SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION IN THE SAME CALENDAR YEAR. A HEARING OR OPPORTUNITY
 TO  BE  HEARD  SHALL  BE  PROVIDED  PRIOR TO THE ASSESSMENT OF ANY CIVIL
 PENALTY.
  5.  THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE AND THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL ARE
 AUTHORIZED TO ENFORCE THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect one year after it shall have become  a
 law.