# Prohibits the manufacture, sale, and use of cookware containing polytetrafluoroethylene

**Bill ID:** S9143
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Nathalia Fernandez
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9143 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9143)

## Summary

Prohibits the manufacture, sale, and use of cookware containing polytetrafluoroethylene.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9143
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 30, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. FERNANDEZ -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  environmental  conservation law, in relation to
  prohibiting the manufacture, sale,  and  use  of  cookware  containing
  polytetrafluoroethylene
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Article 37 of the environmental conservation law is amended
 by adding a new title 11 to read as follows:
  TITLE 11
  POLYTETRAFLUOROETHYLENE COOKWARE
 SECTION 37-1101. DEFINITIONS.
  37-1102. PROHIBITION ON MANUFACTURE, SALE, AND USE  OF  COOKWARE
  CONTAINING POLYTETRAFLUOROETHYLENE.
  37-1103. PREEMPTION.
  37-1104. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
 § 37-1101. DEFINITIONS.
  FOR PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE:
  1.  "COOKWARE" SHALL MEAN SUPPLIES USED FOR COOKING THAT INTERACT WITH
 FOOD, INCLUDING THOSE SUPPLIES USED FOR PREPARING, SERVING, AND  STORING
 FOOD. "COOKWARE" SHALL INCLUDE, BUT SHALL NOT BE LIMITED TO, POTS, PANS,
 SKILLETS, GRILLS, COOKING UTENSILS, AND COOKING APPLIANCES.
  2. "POLYTETRAFLUOROETHYLENE" SHALL MEAN THE COMPOUND USED AS A COATING
 IN  NON-STICK  COOKWARE.  "POLYTETRAFLUOROETHYLENE" MAY ALSO BE KNOWN AS
 "PTFE".
 § 37-1102. PROHIBITION  ON  MANUFACTURE,  SALE,  AND  USE  OF  COOKWARE
  CONTAINING POLYTETRAFLUOROETHYLENE.
  ON  AND AFTER JANUARY FIRST, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FIVE, NO PERSON SHALL
 MANUFACTURE, DISTRIBUTE, SELL OR OFFER FOR SALE, OR USE IN THE STATE ANY
 COOKWARE CONTAINING POLYTETRAFLUOROETHYLENE.
 § 37-1103. PREEMPTION.
  JURISDICTION IN  ALL  MATTERS  PERTAINING  TO  POLYTETRAFLUOROETHYLENE
 COOKWARE  WHICH  IS  REGULATED  PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE
 SHALL BE VESTED EXCLUSIVELY IN THE STATE.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14212-01-4
 S. 9143  2
 
 § 37-1104. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
  THE  DEPARTMENT IS AUTHORIZED TO PROMULGATE SUCH RULES AND REGULATIONS
 AS IT SHALL DEEM NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.
  § 2. This act shall take effect immediately.