# Requires the commissioner of education to establish uniform statewide protocols for diapering and toileting students in public schools

**Bill ID:** S9147B
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John Mannion
**Status:** Senate Floor Calendar
**PDF:** [S9147B PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9147B)

## Summary

Requires the commissioner of education to establish uniform statewide protocols for diapering and toileting of students in public schools.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9147
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  April 30, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. MANNION -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to requiring the  depart-
  ment of education to develop uniform statewide protocols for diapering
  and toileting in public schools
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 305 of the education law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 62 to read as follows:
  62. A. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL  PROMULGATE  RULES  AND  REGULATIONS  TO
 ESTABLISH  UNIFORM  STATEWIDE  PROTOCOLS  FOR DIAPERING AND TOILETING OF
 STUDENTS IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS. SUCH PROTOCOLS  SHALL  INCLUDE  BUT  NOT  BE
 LIMITED  TO:  REQUIRING  SCHOOLS TO PROVIDE STUDENTS AND STAFF WITH SAFE
 AND ACCESSIBLE FACILITIES FOR DIAPERING AND TOILETING; REQUIRING SCHOOLS
 TO PROVIDE THE PROPER EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES  TO  MAINTAIN  A  SAFE  AND
 SANITARY AREA FOR DIAPERING AND TOILETING; AND DEFINING BASIC PROCEDURES
 TO PROMOTE A SAFE AND HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT.
  B.  FOR  THE PURPOSES OF THIS SUBDIVISION, "SCHOOL" SHALL BE DEEMED TO
 INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO, A SCHOOL DISTRICT, PUBLIC SCHOOL,  BOARD
 OF  COOPERATIVE  EDUCATIONAL  SERVICES,  SPECIAL  ACT SCHOOL DISTRICT AS
 DEFINED IN SECTION FOUR THOUSAND ONE OF THIS CHAPTER, APPROVED PRESCHOOL
 SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAM PURSUANT TO SECTION FORTY-FOUR HUNDRED TEN  OF
 THIS CHAPTER, APPROVED PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL OR NON-RESIDENTIAL SCHOOL FOR
 THE  EDUCATION  OF  STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES INCLUDING PRIVATE SCHOOLS
 ESTABLISHED UNDER CHAPTER EIGHT HUNDRED FIFTY-THREE OF THE LAWS OF NINE-
 TEEN HUNDRED SEVENTY-SIX, AND A  STATE-SUPPORTED  SCHOOL  IN  ACCORDANCE
 WITH ARTICLE EIGHTY-FIVE OF THIS CHAPTER.
  ยง  2.  This  act shall take effect eighteen months after it shall have
 become a law. Effective  immediately,  the  addition,  amendment  and/or
 repeal  of  any  rule  or regulation necessary for the implementation of
 this act on its effective date are authorized to be made  and  completed
 on or before such effective date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15081-03-4