# Requires events held by the state or on state property which include alcohol to include alcohol produced within the state

**Bill ID:** S9151
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jeremy Cooney
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9151 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9151)

## Summary

Requires events held by the state or on state property which include alcohol to include alcohol produced within the state.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9151
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 1, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COONEY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Procurement and Contracts
 
 AN ACT to amend the state finance law, the public buildings law, and the
  parks, recreation  and  historic  preservation  law,  in  relation  to
  requiring  events held by the state or on state property which include
  alcohol to include alcohol produced within the state

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  state finance law is amended by adding a new section
 163-e to read as follows:
  § 163-E.  STATE ALCOHOL PRODUCTS. EACH STATE AGENCY, THE  LEGISLATURE,
 AND  THE JUDICIARY SHALL INCLUDE IN ANY SET OF PROCUREMENTS FOR AN EVENT
 WHERE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED  TO,  BEER,  WINE,
 AND  SPIRITS,  WILL BE SERVED A PROCUREMENT FOR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES MADE
 WITHIN THE STATE TO BE SERVED AT SUCH EVENT.
  § 2. The public buildings law is amended by adding a new  section  148
 to read as follows:
  §  148.  STATE  ALCOHOL PRODUCTS. THE COMMISSIONER OF GENERAL SERVICES
 SHALL REQUIRE THAT ANY EVENT WHICH OCCURS IN A  STATE  OWNED  OR  LEASED
 BUILDING  OR THE GROUNDS AND PREMISES ADJACENT OR APPURTENANT THERETO OR
 CONNECTED THERETO OR CONNECTED THEREWITH BELONGING TO  THE  STATE  WHERE
 ALCOHOLIC  BEVERAGES,  INCLUDING,  BUT  NOT  LIMITED TO, BEER, WINE, AND
 SPIRITS, ARE SERVED ALSO SERVE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES MADE WITHIN THE STATE
 AT SUCH EVENT.
  § 3. The parks, recreation and historic preservation law is amended by
 adding a new section 3.27 to read as follows:
  § 3.27 STATE ALCOHOL PRODUCTS. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL REQUIRE THAT ANY
 EVENT WHICH OCCURS IN A STATE  OPERATED  OR  MAINTAINED  HISTORIC  SITE,
 PARK,  PARKWAY  OR  RECREATIONAL  FACILITY  WHERE  ALCOHOLIC  BEVERAGES,
 INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, BEER, WINE, AND SPIRITS, ARE SERVED  ALSO
 SERVE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES MADE WITHIN THE STATE AT SUCH EVENT.
  §  4. This act shall take effect one year after it shall have become a
 law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09885-05-4