# Relates to insurance coverage for in vitro fertilization

**Bill ID:** S9185
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jeremy Cooney
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9185 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9185)

## Summary

Relates to health insurance coverage for in vitro fertilization.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9185
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 2, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COONEY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Insurance
 
 AN ACT to amend the insurance law, in relation to insurance coverage for
  in vitro fertilization
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Item  (viii)  of  subparagraph  (C)  of  paragraph 6 of
 subsection (k) of section 3221 of  the  insurance  law,  as  amended  by
 section  1  of  part  L of chapter 57 of the laws of 2019, is amended to
 read as follows:
  (viii) No  insurer  providing  coverage  under  this  paragraph  shall
 discriminate  based  on an insured's expected length of life, present of
 predicted disability, degree of medical dependency, perceived quality of
 life, or other health conditions, nor based on personal characteristics,
 including age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status or gender identi-
 ty. NO INSURER PROVIDING COVERAGE UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL REQUIRE THE
 TRANSFER OF ALL EMBRYOS FROM A PRIOR CYCLE AS A PREREQUISITE FOR  COVER-
 AGE  OF  A  SUBSEQUENT  CYCLE  FOR  A FEMALE THIRTY-FIVE YEARS OF AGE OR
 OLDER.
  ยง 2. Subparagraph (H) of paragraph 3 of subsection (s) of section 4303
 of the insurance law, as amended by section 2 of part L of chapter 57 of
 the laws of 2019, is amended to read as follows:
  (H) No corporation providing  coverage  under  this  subsection  shall
 discriminate  based  on an insured's expected length of life, present or
 predicted disability, degree of medical dependency, perceived quality of
 life, or other health conditions, nor based on personal characteristics,
 including age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status or gender identi-
 ty. NO  CORPORATION  PROVIDING  COVERAGE  UNDER  THIS  SUBSECTION  SHALL
 REQUIRE THE TRANSFER OF ALL EMBRYOS FROM A PRIOR CYCLE AS A PREREQUISITE
 FOR COVERAGE OF A SUBSEQUENT CYCLE FOR A FEMALE THIRTY-FIVE YEARS OF AGE
 OR OLDER.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15403-01-4