# Provides access to menstrual products in toilet facilities in certain public buildings

**Bill ID:** S9184A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michelle Hinchey
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9184A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9184A)

## Summary

Provides access to menstrual products in toilet facilities in public buildings determined to be opened to the public; requires reporting.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9184
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 2, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. HINCHEY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Women's Issues
 
 AN ACT to amend the public  buildings  law,  in  relation  to  providing
  access  to  menstrual  products in toilet facilities in certain public
  buildings
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The public buildings law is amended by adding a new section
 148 to read as follows:
  ยง 148. ACCESS TO MENSTRUAL PRODUCTS IN TOILET FACILITIES. 1. MENSTRUAL
 PRODUCTS  SHALL  BE  PROVIDED AT NO COST, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
 SANITARY NAPKINS, TAMPONS AND PANTY LINERS IN ALL FEMALE-DESIGNATED  AND
 GENDER-NEUTRAL  WASHROOMS  AND TOILET FACILITIES IN EVERY COVERED PUBLIC
 BUILDING.
  2. TWO YEARS AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION THE COMMISSIONER
 OF GENERAL SERVICES SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND BOTH HOUSES OF  THE
 LEGISLATURE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO:
  I. THE NUMBER OF TOILET FACILITIES THIS SECTION APPLIES TO;
  II. THE COST OF IMPLEMENTING THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION;
  III.  THE  NUMBER  OF  TOILET  FACILITIES  THAT REQUIRED RENOVATION TO
 IMPLEMENT THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION;
  IV. THE TOTAL NUMBER OF MENSTRUAL PRODUCTS PURCHASED BY THE STATE,  IN
 RELATION TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS SECTION, IN THE PRIOR YEAR; AND
  V.  THE  TOTAL COST TO THE STATE TO IMPLEMENT THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS
 SECTION.
  3. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION "COVERED  PUBLIC  BUILDING"  SHALL
 MEAN  A  PUBLIC BUILDING AS DEFINED IN SECTION TWO OF THIS CHAPTER, THAT
 IS DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER OF GENERAL SERVICES TO BE OPEN TO  THE
 PUBLIC. FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION "COVERED PUBLIC BUILDING" SHALL NOT
 MEAN  ACADEMIC BUILDINGS, DORMITORIES, AND OTHER FACILITIES OF THE STATE
 UNIVERSITY SYSTEM.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect one year after it shall have become  a
 law.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07734-03-3