# Relates to creating an advisory board to New York's Office of the Chief Disability Officer

**Bill ID:** S9190
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John Mannion
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9190 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9190)

## Summary

Creates an advisory board to New York's office of the chief disability officer to review the office of the chief disability officer's operations and make recommendations relating to the office of the chief disability officer's policies and procedures.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9190
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 3, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. MANNION -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Finance
 
 AN ACT to amend the executive law, in relation to creating  an  advisory
  board to the New York state office of the chief disability officer
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Subdivision 3 of  section  4-b  of  the  executive  law  is
 amended by adding a new paragraph (d) to read as follows:
  (D)(I)  AN  OFFICE  OF  THE  CHIEF  DISABILITY  OFFICER ADVISORY BOARD
 CONSISTING OF STATE EMPLOYEES, WHOSE NUMBER SHALL BE DESIGNATED  BY  THE
 GOVERNOR,  IS CREATED TO REVIEW THE OFFICE OF THE CHIEF DISABILITY OFFI-
 CER'S OPERATIONS AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS RELATING TO THE OFFICE OF  THE
 CHIEF DISABILITY OFFICER'S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
  (II)  THE  GOVERNOR  SHALL  APPOINT MEMBERS OF THE ADVISORY BOARD. THE
 MEMBERS OF THE ADVISORY BOARD SHALL BE STATE EMPLOYEES FROM  THE  OFFICE
 FOR PEOPLE WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES, THE NEW YORK STATE OFFICE OF
 EMPLOYEE  RELATIONS,  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  CIVIL  SERVICE, THE OFFICE OF
 MENTAL HEALTH, ACCESS VR, THE NEW YORK STATE COMMISSION  FOR  THE  BLIND
 AND  ANY  REPRESENTATIVE FROM OTHER EXECUTIVE AGENCIES OR DEPARTMENTS AS
 DETERMINED BY THE GOVERNOR AND SHALL REPRESENT A DIVERSITY OF EXPERIENCE
 RELEVANT TO ACTIVITIES OF THE OFFICE OF THE  CHIEF  DISABILITY  OFFICER.
 ALL  ADVISORY  BOARD  MEMBERS SHALL BE CURRENT STATE EMPLOYEES AND THEIR
 DUTIES ON THE ADVISORY BOARD SHALL NOT COME WITH ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION
 OR OTHER STATE BENEFITS. ADVISORY BOARD MEMBERS SHALL SERVE AT THE PLEA-
 SURE OF THE GOVERNOR.
  (III) THE BOARD SHALL CHOOSE A CHAIR FROM AMONG ITS MEMBERSHIP.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14441-02-4