# Prohibits the purchase of single-use plastic bottles by the state and any governmental entity or political subdivision or public benefit corporation thereof

**Bill ID:** S9204
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew Gounardes
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9204 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9204)

## Summary

Prohibits the purchase of single-use plastic bottles by the state and any governmental entity or political subdivision or public benefit corporation thereof except for when required by health requirements, emergencies, or when no other alternative is available or practicable.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9204
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 6, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. GOUNARDES -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Procurement and Contracts
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend the state finance law, in relation to prohibiting the
  purchase of single-use plastic bottles by the state  and  any  govern-
  mental  entity  or political subdivision or public benefit corporation
  thereof

  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 165 of the state finance law is amended by adding a
 new subdivision 2-a to read as follows:
  2-A. PROHIBITION ON THE PURCHASE OF SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BOTTLES.
  A.  EXCEPT  AS PROVIDED IN THIS SUBDIVISION, THE STATE AND ANY GOVERN-
 MENTAL AGENCY OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OR PUBLIC BENEFIT CORPORATION  OF
 THE  STATE  SHALL  NOT PURCHASE OR OBTAIN FOR ANY PURPOSE ANY SINGLE-USE
 PLASTIC BOTTLES.
  B. THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL NOT APPLY:
  (I) WHEN NO OTHER ALTERNATIVE IS AVAILABLE OR PRACTICABLE;
  (II) WHEN NECESSARY TO ADDRESS HEALTH REQUIREMENTS AND EMERGENCIES; OR
  (III) WHEN  COMPLIANCE  WITH  THIS  SUBDIVISION  WOULD  CONFLICT  WITH
 CONTRACT  REQUIREMENTS  IN  EXISTENCE  AS  OF THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS
 SUBDIVISION.
  C. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL INVESTIGATE ANY VIOLATION OF THIS SUBDI-
 VISION AND PROVIDE A REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR, THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT  OF
 THE SENATE, AND THE SPEAKER OF THE ASSEMBLY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD13488-02-3