# Relates to equipping motor vehicles with radio devices

**Bill ID:** S9231
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jessica Scarcella-Spanton
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S9231 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9231)

## Summary

Relates to equipping certain motor vehicles with radio devices.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9231
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 7, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SCARCELLA-SPANTON -- (at request of the Division of
  Homeland Security and Emergency Services) -- read  twice  and  ordered
  printed,  and  when printed to be committed to the Committee on Trans-
  portation
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic law, in  relation  to  equipping
  vehicles with radio devices

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 397 of the vehicle and traffic law, as  amended  by
 chapter 843 of the laws of 1980, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 397. Equipping  motor  vehicles with radio receiving sets capable of
 receiving signals on the  frequencies  allocated  for  police  use.  A
 person,  not a police officer or peace officer, acting pursuant to [his]
 THEIR special duties, who equips a motor vehicle with a radio  receiving
 set capable of receiving signals on the frequencies allocated for police
 use  or  knowingly  uses  a  motor vehicle so equipped or who in any way
 knowingly interferes with the transmission  of  radio  messages  by  the
 police  without  having  first secured a permit so to do from the person
 authorized to issue such a permit by the local governing body  or  board
 of the city, town or village in which such person resides, or where such
 person  resides outside of a city or village in a county having a county
 police department by the board of supervisors of such county, is  guilty
 of  a  misdemeanor,  punishable  by  a  fine  not exceeding one thousand
 dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.  Nothing  in
 this  section  contained  shall  be construed to apply to any person who
 holds a valid amateur radio operator's license  issued  by  the  federal
 communications  commission  and  who  operates  a duly licensed portable
 mobile transmitter and in connection therewith a receiver  or  receiving
 set  on  frequencies exclusively allocated by the federal communications
 commission to duly licensed radio amateurs. THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY
 TO ANY EMPLOYEE OF THE  DIVISION  OF  HOMELAND  SECURITY  AND  EMERGENCY
 SERVICES,  AS  ESTABLISHED  BY  ARTICLE TWENTY-SIX OF THE EXECUTIVE LAW,
 ACTING PURSUANT TO THEIR OFFICIAL DUTIES.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14167-01-4