# Designates a portion of the state highway system the "Senior Investigator Thomas M. O'Neill Memorial Bridge"

**Bill ID:** S9262
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Monica Martinez
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S9262 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9262)

## Summary

Designates the bridge over the Sagtikos Parkway constituting the Crooked Hill Road Overpass in the town of Islip, county of Suffolk, the "Senior Investigator Thomas M. O'Neill Memorial Bridge".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9262
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 8, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. MARTINEZ -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "Senior Investigator Thomas M. O'Neill
  Memorial Bridge"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-p to
 read as follows:
  ยง  344-P.  PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "SENIOR INVESTIGATOR THOMAS M.  O'NEILL  MEMORIAL  BRIDGE".  ALL  THAT
 PORTION  OF  THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM CONSTITUTING THE CROOKED HILL ROAD
 OVERPASS CROSSING OVER THE SAGTIKOS PARKWAY IN THE TOWN OF ISLIP, COUNTY
 OF SUFFOLK, SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS  THE  "SENIOR  INVESTIGATOR
 THOMAS M. O'NEILL MEMORIAL BRIDGE".
  ยง  2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the instal-
 lation and maintenance of adequate signing of the state  highway  system
 as  designated  pursuant  to section one of this act.  However, to avoid
 confusion and to limit any possible disruption of commerce,  the  desig-
 nation  called  for  pursuant to section one of this act shall be one of
 ceremonial nature and the official name of  such  bridge  shall  not  be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD06286-05-4