# Allows evidence of a defendant's prior sexual offense to be admissible in a sexual offense proceeding

**Bill ID:** S9276
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Michael Gianaris
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S9276 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9276)

## Summary

Allows evidence of a defendant's prior sexual offense to be admissible in a sexual assault proceeding.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9276
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 9, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  GIANARIS, HOYLMAN-SIGAL -- read twice and ordered
  printed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the criminal procedure  law,  in  relation  to  allowing
  evidence  of  a defendant's prior sexual offense to be admissible in a
  sexual assault proceeding
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  The  criminal  procedure  law  is amended by adding a new
 section 60.77 to read as follows:
 ยง 60.77 RULES OF EVIDENCE; ADMISSIBILITY OF DEFENDANT COMMITTING ANOTHER
  SEXUAL OFFENSE IN A SEXUAL OFFENSE CASE.
  1. IN A CRIMINAL PROCEEDING IN WHICH A DEFENDANT IS ACCUSED OF A SEXU-
 AL OFFENSE, THE COURT MAY ADMIT EVIDENCE THAT  THE  DEFENDANT  COMMITTED
 ANY  OTHER SEXUAL OFFENSE. SUCH EVIDENCE MAY BE CONSIDERED ON ANY MATTER
 TO WHICH IT IS RELEVANT, INCLUDING TO PROVE THAT THE DEFENDANT ACTED  IN
 CONFORMITY  THEREWITH  OR HAD A PROPENSITY TO ENGAGE IN SIMILAR WRONGFUL
 ACTS.
  2. THE COURT, IN ITS DISCRETION, MAY  EXCLUDE  SUCH  EVIDENCE  IF  ITS
 PROBATIVE VALUE IS OUTWEIGHED BY THE PROBABILITY THAT ITS ADMISSION WILL
 CREATE UNDUE PREJUDICE TO THE DEFENDANT.
  3. FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "SEXUAL OFFENSE" SHALL INCLUDE AN ACT
 COMMITTED  IN  ANY  JURISDICTION THAT INVOLVES CONDUCT PROSCRIBED BY ANY
 SECTION OF ARTICLE ONE HUNDRED THIRTY OF THE PENAL LAW,  OR  BY  SECTION
 230.34 OR 230.34-A OF THE PENAL LAW.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02949-08-4