# Directs the assignment of a personal identification number to each application for acceptance to the state university and the city university

**Bill ID:** S9302
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Jackson
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9302 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9302)

## Summary

Provides that each state and city college or university assign a personal identification number to each application for acceptance to be used during the admissions process in place of any other identifying information including names and addresses.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9302
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 10, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. JACKSON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Higher Education
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to the  assignment  of  a
  personal  identification  number to each application for acceptance to
  the state university and the city university
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 355 of the education law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 22 to read as follows:
  22.  THE STATE UNIVERSITY TRUSTEES SHALL MANDATE THAT EACH STATE-OPER-
 ATED INSTITUTION OF THE STATE UNIVERSITY PROVIDE FOR THE ASSIGNMENT OF A
 PERSONAL  IDENTIFICATION  NUMBER  TO  EACH  APPLICATION  FOR  ACCEPTANCE
 RECEIVED  BY SUCH INSTITUTION. SUCH PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER SHALL
 BE USED THROUGHOUT THE ADMISSIONS PROCESS IN PLACE OF ANY OTHER  IDENTI-
 FYING  INFORMATION  RELATING  TO SUCH PROSPECTIVE STUDENT INCLUDING NAME
 AND ADDRESS, UNTIL SUCH TIME AS A STUDENT IS ACCEPTED OR  DENIED  ADMIS-
 SION.
  ยง  2.  Section  6206 of the education law is amended by adding a new
 subdivision 2-a to read as follows:
  2-A. THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES SHALL MANDATE THAT EACH COLLEGE OF THE CITY
 UNIVERSITY PROVIDE FOR  THE  ASSIGNMENT  OF  A  PERSONAL  IDENTIFICATION
 NUMBER  TO EACH APPLICATION FOR ACCEPTANCE RECEIVED BY SUCH INSTITUTION.
 SUCH PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER SHALL BE USED THROUGHOUT THE  ADMIS-
 SIONS  PROCESS IN PLACE OF ANY OTHER IDENTIFYING INFORMATION RELATING TO
 SUCH PROSPECTIVE STUDENT INCLUDING NAME AND ADDRESS, UNTIL SUCH TIME  AS
 A STUDENT IS ACCEPTED OR DENIED ADMISSION.
  ยง  3.  This  act shall take effect on the thirtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14130-01-4