# Includes digital health care service platforms in the definition of temporary health care services agency

**Bill ID:** S9314
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Gustavo Rivera
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9314 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9314)

## Summary

Includes digital health care service platforms in the definition of temporary health care services agency; includes the connection of health care personnel to services at a health care entity in the term assign.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9314
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 10, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  RIVERA -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Health
 
 AN ACT to amend the public health law, in relation to including  digital
  health  care  service  platforms in the definition of temporary health
  care services agency
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. Subdivision 8 of section 2999-ii of the public health law,
 as added by part X of section 1 of chapter 57 of the laws  of  2023,  is
 amended and a new subdivision 9 is added to read as follows:
  8. "Temporary health care services agency" or "agency" means a person,
 firm, corporation, partnership, association or other entity in the busi-
 ness of providing or procuring [temporary employment] SERVICES of health
 care  personnel  for  health care entities, OR OF CONNECTING HEALTH CARE
 PERSONNEL TO HEALTH CARE ENTITIES, INCLUDING VIA A PLATFORM OR  APPLICA-
 TION  ON  THE  INTERNET.  Temporary  health  care  services agency shall
 include a nurses' registry licensed under article eleven of the  general
 business  law  and  entities that utilize apps or other technology-based
 solutions to provide or procure  temporary  employment  of  health  care
 personnel in health care entities. Temporary health care services agency
 shall  not  include: (a) an individual who only engages in providing the
 individual's own services on a temporary basis to health care  entities;
 or  (b)  a  home  care  agency licensed under article thirty-six of this
 chapter.
  9. "ASSIGN" INCLUDES  THE  CONNECTION  OF  HEALTH  CARE  PERSONNEL  TO
 SERVICES AT A HEALTH CARE ENTITY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15144-01-4