# Allows certain reusable beverage containers in sports venues

**Bill ID:** S9330A
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9330A PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9330A)

## Summary

Allows certain reusable beverage containers in sports venues.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9330
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 13, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  PARKER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Consumer Protection
 
 AN ACT to amend the  general  business  law,  in  relation  to  allowing
  certain reusable beverage containers in sports venues
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The general business law is amended by adding a new section
 391-r to read as follows:
  ยง 391-R.  REUSABLE  BEVERAGE  CONTAINERS  IN  SPORTS  VENUES.  1.  FOR
 PURPOSES  OF  THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING TERMS SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING
 MEANINGS:
  (A) "REUSABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER" MEANS  A  DRINKING  VESSEL  THAT  IS
 COMPOSED  PRIMARILY  OF ALUMINUM OR STAINLESS STEEL, AND IS DESIGNED AND
 MANUFACTURED TO BE CAPABLE OF MULTIPLE REUSES,  INCLUDING  A  BOTTLE  OR
 CUP.
  (B)  "SPORTS  VENUE"  MEANS  A  BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR PLACE IN WHICH
 PROFESSIONAL OR COLLEGIATE SPORTING COMPETITIONS ARE HELD.
  2. A SPORTS VENUE SHALL  NOT  PROHIBIT  AN  INDIVIDUAL  ATTENDING  ANY
 PROFESSIONAL  OR  COLLEGIATE  SPORTING  COMPETITION IN SUCH SPORTS VENUE
 FROM BRINGING A REUSABLE  BEVERAGE  CONTAINER  INTO  THE  SPORTS  VENUE;
 PROVIDED, HOWEVER:
  (A)  A  SPORTS  VENUE MAY REQUIRE THAT REUSABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS BE
 EMPTY UPON ENTERING THE SPORTS VENUE; AND
  (B) A SPORTS VENUE MAY RESTRICT REUSABLE BEVERAGE  CONTAINERS  CAPABLE
 OF HOLDING MORE THAN TWENTY-FOUR FLUID OUNCES.
  3. ANY SPORTS VENUE THAT VIOLATES THIS SECTION OR ANY RULE PROMULGATED
 PURSUANT  THERETO SHALL BE LIABLE FOR A CIVIL PENALTY NOT TO EXCEED FIVE
 HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR THE FIRST VIOLATION, AND SEVEN HUNDRED FIFTY DOLLARS
 FOR ANY SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it shall have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15219-03-4