# Establishes the crime of criminal possession of a flamethrower

**Bill ID:** S9399
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Skoufis
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9399 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9399)

## Summary

Establishes the crime of criminal possession of a flamethrower as a class E felony.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9399
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 15, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SKOUFIS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Codes
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to  adding  possession  of  a
  flamethrower  to  the  crime of criminal possession of a weapon in the
  fourth degree
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Section 265.00 of the penal law is amended by adding four
 new subdivisions 36, 37, 38 and 39 to read as follows:
  36. "FLAMETHROWER" MEANS A DEVICE CAPABLE OF PROJECTING  A  STREAM  OF
 BURNING FUEL A DISTANCE OF AT LEAST THREE FEET. INOPERABLE DISPLAY UNITS
 SHALL  NOT  BE  CONSIDERED  "FLAMETHROWERS"  FOR  THE  PURPOSES  OF THIS
 SECTION.
  37. "HISTORICAL FLAMETHROWER" MEANS  A  FLAMETHROWER  CONSTRUCTED,  IN
 WHOLE  OR IN SUBSTANTIAL PART, OF COMPONENTS MANUFACTURED PRIOR TO NINE-
 TEEN HUNDRED SIXTY-SIX.
  38. "SUBSTANTIAL PART" MEANS CONSTRUCTED WITH AT  LEAST  FIVE  SIGNIF-
 ICANT COMPONENTS MANUFACTURED PRIOR TO NINETEEN HUNDRED SIXTY-SIX.
  39.  "SIGNIFICANT  COMPONENTS"  MEANS  FULLY  FUNCTIONAL AND NECESSARY
 PARTS FOR THE OPERATION OF A FLAMETHROWER INCLUDING:
  (A) FUEL CELL;
  (B) GAS CAPS;
  (C) PRESSURE REGULATOR;
  (D) PRESSURE BOTTLE;
  (E) HOSE;
  (F) WAND FUEL VALVE;
  (G) BARREL;
  (H) FRONT GRIP;
  (I) IGNITION SHIELD; AND
  (J) REAR GRIP.
  ยง 2. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 265.41  to  read
 as follows:
 ยง 265.41 CRIMINAL POSSESSION OF A FLAMETHROWER.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD02830-01-3
 S. 9399  2
 
  A PERSON IS GUILTY OF CRIMINAL POSSESSION OF A FLAMETHROWER WHEN HE OR
 SHE  POSSESSES  A  FLAMETHROWER; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT NOTHING IN THIS
 SECTION SHALL PROHIBIT THE MANUFACTURE,  REMANUFACTURE,  RESTORATION  OR
 ALTERATION  OF  FLAMETHROWER COMPONENTS. THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY TO
 HISTORICAL  FLAMETHROWERS,  FLAMETHROWERS  USED  FOR  AGRICULTURAL  OR
 CONSTRUCTION  PURPOSES  OR  ANY  FLAMETHROWER  LAWFULLY  ACQUIRED  AND
 POSSESSED PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS SECTION.
  CRIMINAL POSSESSION OF A FLAMETHROWER IS A CLASS E FELONY.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it shall have become a law.