# Requires investor-owned energy utilities publish on its customer-facing website both its promotional and educational materials

**Bill ID:** S9402
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Cordell Cleare
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9402 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9402)

## Summary

Enacts the utility materials disclosure act to require investor-owned energy utilities publish on its customer-facing website both its promotional and educational materials and file such materials with the public service commission.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9402
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 15, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CLEARE -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on  Energy  and  Telecommuni-
  cations
 
 AN  ACT  to amend the public service law, in relation to requiring inve-
  stor-owned energy utilities publish  on  its  customer-facing  website
  both its promotional and educational materials

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Short title. This act shall be known and may  be  cited  as
 the "utility materials disclosure act".
  ยง  2.  The public service law is amended by adding a new section 28 to
 read as follows:
  ยง 28. MATERIALS TO BE PUBLISHED. 1. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS  SECTION,
 "INVESTOR-OWNED ENERGY UTILITY" SHALL MEAN ANY GAS CORPORATION, ELECTRIC
 CORPORATION, OR COMBINATION GAS AND ELECTRIC CORPORATION.
  2.  THE  DEPARTMENT  SHALL REQUIRE EVERY INVESTOR-OWNED ENERGY UTILITY
 PUBLISH ON ITS CUSTOMER-FACING WEBSITE, AND FILE  WITH  THE  COMMISSION,
 ANY  PROMOTIONAL  AND  EDUCATIONAL  MATERIALS SUCH INVESTOR-OWNED ENERGY
 UTILITY MAKES AVAILABLE TO CUSTOMERS DIGITALLY OR IN PRINT.  A  LIST  OF
 SUCH  FILES  SHALL  BE PUBLISHED WITH THE ORIGINAL TITLE AND PUBLICATION
 DATE ON A PAGE THAT IS EASILY ACCESSIBLE FROM THE WEBSITE MENU.
  3. SUCH MATERIALS REFERENCED IN SUBDIVISION TWO OF THIS SECTION  SHALL
 REMAIN  POSTED  ON  AN  INVESTOR-OWNED  ENERGY UTILITY'S CUSTOMER-FACING
 WEBSITE THREE YEARS FROM THE DATE SUCH MATERIALS ARE PUBLISHED.
  4. IF AN INVESTOR-OWNED ENERGY UTILITY IS FOUND TO BE IN VIOLATION  OF
 THIS  SECTION,  PENALTIES  OR  SANCTIONS  SHALL  BE ASSESSED PURSUANT TO
 SECTION TWENTY-FIVE OR TWENTY-FIVE-A OF THIS ARTICLE, AS APPLICABLE.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect on the thirtieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amendment and/or
 repeal  of  any  rule  or regulation necessary for the implementation of
 this act on its effective date are authorized to be made  and  completed
 on or before such date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14392-03-4