# Requires the department of social services to issue EMV-compliant or similar electronic benefit transfer cards and process all electronic benefit transfer system transactions using dynamic data authentication

**Bill ID:** S9484
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Roxanne J. Persaud
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9484 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9484)

## Summary

Requires the department of social services to issue EMV-compliant or similar electronic benefit transfer cards and process all electronic benefit transfer system transactions using dynamic data authentication.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9484
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 16, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. PERSAUD -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Social Services
 
 AN ACT to amend the social services law, in relation  to  requiring  the
  department  of social services to issue EMV-compliant or similar elec-
  tronic benefit transfer  cards  and  process  all  electronic  benefit
  transfer system transactions using dynamic data authentication

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The  opening  paragraph  of  section  21-a  of  the  social
 services  law,  as  amended  by section 1 of part F of chapter 58 of the
 laws of 2014, is amended to read as follows:
  Any electronic benefit transfer system shall  be  implemented  by  the
 department  on  a  statewide basis and shall be administered pursuant to
 the provisions of this section. For purposes of such electronic  benefit
 transfer system, the term "electronic benefit transfer" includes the use
 of  a  credit or debit card service, automated teller machine, point-of-
 sale terminal, or access to an online system for the withdrawal of funds
 or the processing of a payment for merchandise or a service. THE DEPART-
 MENT SHALL ISSUE EMV-COMPLIANT OR SIMILAR  ELECTRONIC  BENEFIT  TRANSFER
 CARDS  AND  PROCESS  ALL ELECTRONIC BENEFIT TRANSFER SYSTEM TRANSACTIONS
 USING DYNAMIC DATA AUTHENTICATION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the first of January next  succeed-
 ing the date on which it shall have become a law. Effective immediately,
 the  addition,  amendment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation neces-
 sary for the implementation of  this  act  on  its  effective  date  are
 authorized to be made and completed on or before such effective date.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15528-01-4