# Requires helicopter pilots to have completed certain training before operating a helicopter within the state

**Bill ID:** S9489
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jeremy Cooney
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9489 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9489)

## Summary

Requires helicopter pilots to have completed a helicopter safety and risk management training course utilizing a flight simulator training device certified by either the federal aviation administration or the European aviation safety agency before operating a helicopter within the state.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9489
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 16, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens. COONEY, ADDABBO -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the general business law, in relation to requiring heli-
  copter pilots to have completed certain training  before  operating  a
  helicopter within the state
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Section 241 of the general business law, as added by  chap-
 ter 233 of the laws of 1928, is amended to read as follows:
  ยง 241. Qualifications of operator; federal license; HELICOPTER SAFETY.
 1. The public safety requiring, and the advantages of uniform regulation
 making  it  desirable,  in the interest of aeronautical progress, that a
 person engaging within this state in operating aircraft, in any form  of
 avigation  for  which a license to operate aircraft issued by the United
 States government would then be required if such avigation  were  inter-
 state,  should have the qualifications necessary for obtaining and hold-
 ing such a license, it shall be unlawful for any  person  to  engage  in
 operating  aircraft  within  the  state,  in any such form of avigation,
 unless [he have] SUCH PERSON HAS such a license.
  2. IN ADDITION TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBDIVISION ONE OF THIS SECTION,
 IT SHALL BE UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON TO ENGAGE IN OPERATING A  HELICOPTER
 WITHIN  THE STATE, IN ANY SUCH FORM OF AVIGATION, UNLESS SUCH PERSON HAS
 COMPLETED A  HELICOPTER  SAFETY  AND  RISK  MANAGEMENT  TRAINING  COURSE
 UTILIZING  A  FLIGHT  SIMULATOR  TRAINING DEVICE CERTIFIED BY EITHER THE
 FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION OR THE EUROPEAN AVIATION SAFETY AGENCY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15606-01-4