# Requires labels on certain foods and beverages containing harmful ingredients

**Bill ID:** S9527
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Nathalia Fernandez
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9527 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9527)

## Summary

Requires harmful ingredient labels on certain foods and beverages containing harmful ingredients; requires the creation of rules and regulations regarding the content and placement of harmful ingredient labels.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9527
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 16, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. FERNANDEZ -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Agriculture
 
 AN  ACT to amend the agriculture and markets law, in relation to requir-
  ing labels on certain foods and beverages containing harmful  ingredi-
  ents
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The agriculture and markets law is amended by adding a  new
 section 214-p to read as follows:
  ยง  214-P.  LABELING OF FOODS AND BEVERAGES CONTAINING HARMFUL INGREDI-
 ENTS. 1. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS ARTICLE, THE TERM "HARMFUL INGREDIENT"
 SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE LIMITED TO:
  (A) BROMINATED VEGETABLE OIL;
  (B) POTASSIUM BROMATE;
  (C) PROPYLPARABEN;
  (D) RED DYE 3;
  (E) TITANIUM DIOXIDE; AND
  (F) ANY OTHER INGREDIENT DEEMED HARMFUL BY THE COMMISSIONER IN CONSUL-
 TATION WITH THE COMMISSIONER OF HEALTH.
  2. NO PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION, PARTNERSHIP, ASSOCIATION OR ANY OTHER
 BUSINESS ASSOCIATION SHALL SELL AT RETAIL OR DISPLAY FOR SALE AT  RETAIL
 ANY  FOOD  OR  BEVERAGE  FOR  HUMAN CONSUMPTION WHICH CONTAINS A HARMFUL
 INGREDIENT UNLESS THE CONTAINER OF SUCH  FOOD  OR  BEVERAGE  IS  CLEARLY
 MARKED WITH A HARMFUL INGREDIENT LABEL.
  3.  THE COMMISSIONER, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE COMMISSIONER OF HEALTH,
 SHALL PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS REGARDING THE CONTENT AND  PLACE-
 MENT  OF  HARMFUL  INGREDIENT  LABELS ON REQUIRED FOOD OR BEVERAGE WHICH
 SHALL INCLUDE, BUT NOT BE  LIMITED  TO,  THE  USE  OF  PLAIN  AND  CLEAR
 LANGUAGE.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred eightieth day after
 it  shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition, amend-
 ment and/or repeal of any rule or regulation necessary for the implemen-
 tation of this act on its effective date are authorized to be  made  and
 completed on or before such date.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14111-01-4