# Relates to restrictions on certain homeowners associations

**Bill ID:** S9556
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jeremy Cooney
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9556 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9556)

## Summary

Imposes restrictions on the usage of pesticides and outdoor sprinkler systems on certain homeowners associations.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9556
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 16, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  COONEY -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Judiciary
 
 AN ACT to amend the real property law, in relation  to  restrictions  on
  certain activities by homeowners associations
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The real property law is amended by adding  a  new  article
 9-e to read as follows:
  ARTICLE 9-E
  RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN ACTIVITIES BY HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATIONS
 SECTION 344-A. RESTRICTIONS ON THE USAGE OF PESTICIDES.
  344-B. RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF OUTDOOR SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
  ยง 344-A. RESTRICTIONS ON THE USAGE OF PESTICIDES. A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCI-
 ATION  MAY  NOT  REQUIRE  AN OWNER TO APPLY A PESTICIDE, AS SUCH TERM IS
 DEFINED IN SECTION 33-0101 OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL  CONSERVATION  LAW,  AND
 SHALL ALLOW ANY OWNER TO EXCLUDE THE OWNER'S PROPERTY FROM THE LANDSCAP-
 ING  ACTIVITIES  OF THE ASSOCIATION THAT INCLUDE APPLICATION OF A PESTI-
 CIDE, EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT A PESTICIDE OR OTHER PEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE
 IS NECESSARY TO MANAGE OR PREVENT A PEST ISSUE THAT COULD HARM  ECOLOGI-
 CAL OR PUBLIC HEALTH.
  ยง  344-B. RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF OUTDOOR SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. A HOMEOWN-
 ERS ASSOCIATION MAY NOT REQUIRE AN OWNER TO USE  ANY  OUTDOOR  SPRINKLER
 SYSTEM.
  ยง  2.  This  act  shall take effect on the sixtieth day after it shall
 have become a law.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15623-01-4