# Permits New York city correction officers to borrow from accumulated contributions; repealer

**Bill ID:** S9592
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Robert Jackson
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9592 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9592)

## Summary

Permits NYC correction officers to borrow from accumulated contributions.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9592
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 16, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. JACKSON -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Civil Service and Pensions
 
 AN ACT to amend the administrative code of the city of New York and  the
  retirement  and social security law, in relation to permitting certain
  New York city correction members  to  borrow  from  their  accumulated
  member  contributions; and to repeal certain provisions of the retire-
  ment and social security law relating thereto
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1.  Paragraph  8  of  subdivision  d  of section 445-a of the
 retirement and social security law is REPEALED and paragraphs 9  and  10
 are renumbered paragraphs 8 and 9.
  §  2. Paragraph 12 of subdivision d of section 445-c of the retirement
 and social security law is REPEALED and paragraphs 13,  14  and  15  are
 renumbered paragraphs 12, 13 and 14.
  §  3.  Paragraph 9 of subdivision e of section 504-a of the retirement
 and social security law is REPEALED.
  § 4. Paragraph 13 of subdivision e of section 504-b of the  retirement
 and social security law is REPEALED.
  § 5. Subdivision a of section 13-140 of the administrative code of the
 city  of  New  York,  as  amended by chapter 642 of the laws of 1985, is
 amended to read as follows:
  a. Any member in city service who shall have been a member continuous-
 ly at least three years, may borrow from the  contingent  reserve  fund,
 subject  to such rules and regulations as may be approved by such board,
 an amount not exceeding THE SUM OF (I) seventy-five per  centum  of  the
 amount  in  [his  or  her]  SUCH MEMBER'S account in the annuity savings
 fund, (II) ALL ADDITIONAL CONTRIBUTIONS, TOGETHER WITH INTEREST THEREON,
 MADE BY SUCH MEMBER PURSUANT TO SECTION FOUR HUNDRED FORTY-FIVE-A OF THE
 RETIREMENT AND SOCIAL SECURITY LAW, AND (III)  ALL  ADDITIONAL  CONTRIB-
 UTIONS,  TOGETHER WITH INTEREST THEREON, MADE BY SUCH MEMBER PURSUANT TO
 SECTION FOUR HUNDRED FORTY-FIVE-C OF THE RETIREMENT AND SOCIAL  SECURITY
 LAW.  The rate of interest payable on any loan made under this section
 shall be two per centum higher than the rate of regular interest credit-
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08662-04-4
 S. 9592  2
 
 able to the account of the member. The amount so borrowed, together with
 interest on any unpaid balance thereof shall be repaid to the retirement
 system in equal installments by deduction from the compensation  of  the
 member at the time the compensation is paid, but such installments shall
 be  at  least five per centum of the member's earnable compensation. All
 payments of principal and interest made by such member shall be credited
 to the contingent reserve fund.
  § 6. Paragraph 1 of subdivision b of section 517-c of  the  retirement
 and  social  security law, as amended by section 1 of part JJ of chapter
 55 of the laws of 2023, is amended to read as follows:
  1. A member of the New York  state  and  local  employees'  retirement
 system,  the New York state and local police and fire retirement system,
 the New York city employees' retirement system, the New York city  board
 of  education retirement system or the New York city police pension fund
 in active service who has credit for at least one year of member service
 may borrow, no more than once during each twelve month period, an amount
 not exceeding seventy-five  percent  of  the  total  contributions  made
 pursuant  to section FIVE HUNDRED FOUR-A (INCLUDING INTEREST CREDITED AT
 THE RATE SET FORTH IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF PARAGRAPH EIGHT  OF  SUBDIVI-
 SION  E  OF  SUCH  SECTION  FIVE HUNDRED FOUR-A COMPOUNDED ANNUALLY), OR
 SECTION FIVE HUNDRED FOUR-B (INCLUDING INTEREST CREDITED AT THE RATE SET
 FORTH IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF PARAGRAPH TWELVE OF SUBDIVISION E OF  SUCH
 SECTION FIVE HUNDRED FOUR-B COMPOUNDED ANNUALLY) OR SECTION five hundred
 seventeen  of  this article (including interest credited at the rate set
 forth in subdivision c of such section five hundred seventeen compounded
 annually) and not less than one thousand  dollars[,  provided,  however,
 that  the  provisions of this section shall not apply to a New York city
 uniformed correction/sanitation revised plan member or  an  investigator
 revised plan member].
  § 7. This act shall take effect immediately.
  FISCAL NOTE.--Pursuant to Legislative Law, Section 50:
  SUMMARY: This proposed legislation would permit NYCERS Tier 2 and Tier
 3  members  participating  in  the  Correction Officers 20-Year Improved
 Benefit Program (CO-20 Plans)  and  for  similar  plans  for  Correction
 Captains  and  above  (CC-20 Plans), to take loans against their accumu-
 lated Additional Member Contributions (AMC) with interest.
 
  EXPECTED INCREASE (DECREASE) IN EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS
  by Fiscal Year for the first 25 years ($ in Millions)
  Year  NYCERS
  2025  3.5
  2026  3.5
  2027  0.1
  2028  0.1
  2029  0.1
  2030  0.1
  2031  0.0
  2032  0.0
  2033  0.0
  2034  0.0
  2035  0.0
  2036  0.0
  2037  0.0
  2038  0.0
  2039  0.0
  2040  0.0
 S. 9592  3
 
  2041  0.0
  2042  0.0
  2043  0.0
  2044  0.0
  2045  0.0
  2046  0.0
  2047  0.0
  2048  0.0
  2049  0.0
  The potential costs related to lost investment earnings are not
  included above.
 
  The  increase  in employer contributions will be allocated to New York
 City.
 
  INITIAL INCREASE (DECREASE) IN ACTUARIAL LIABILITIES
  as of June 30, 2023 ($ in Millions)
  Present Value (PV)  NYCERS
  PV of Benefits:  6.4
  PV of Employee Contributions:  0.0
  PV of Employer Contributions:  6.4
  Unfunded Accrued Liabilities:  5.7
 
  AMORTIZATION OF UNFUNDED ACCRUED LIABILITY
  NYCERS
  Number of Payments:  2
  Fiscal Year of Last Payment:  2026
  Amortization Payment:  3.3 M
 
  Unfunded Accrued Liability increases were amortized over the  expected
 remaining  working  lifetime  of  those  impacted by the benefit changes
 using level dollar payments.
  CENSUS DATA: The estimates presented herein are based  on  preliminary
 census  data  collected  as  of  June  30, 2023. The census data for the
 impacted population is summarized below.
 
  NYCERS
  Active Members
  - Number Count:  489
  - Average Age:  52.6
  - Average Service:  22.4
  - Average Salary:  149,300

  IMPACT ON MEMBER  BENEFITS:  The  proposed  legislation  would  permit
 NYCERS  members who are participants in the Tier 2 CO-20 and CC-20 Plans
 to borrow 100% of their AMC, and permit Tier  3  CO-20  and  CC-20  Plan
 participants to borrow up to 75% of their AMC.
  The loans on the AMC would be in addition to the currently permissible
 loans on Basic Member Contributions for such Plans.
  Employer  contributions will increase if a member takes a loan and the
 assets earn more than the rate of interest charged for the loan,  or  if
 there is an outstanding loan balance at retirement.
  Currently,  member contributions are invested with other NYCERS assets
 which are expected to earn 7.0% per annum. When an active member borrows
 member contributions from NYCERS, the loan is repaid  with  interest  at
 6.0%  per annum prior to retirement. The potential costs related to lost
 S. 9592  4
 
 investment earnings are not included  in  the  costs  measured  in  this
 fiscal note.
  In  the  event  an  outstanding loan balance exists at retirement, the
 balance of the unpaid loan is converted to an annuity based on the yield
 on 30-year U.S. Treasury securities and deducted from the annual retire-
 ment allowance otherwise payable. This conversion is made on an actuari-
 al basis that is different than the basis used to determine the employer
 contributions to NYCERS, and unpaid loans therefore result in  costs  to
 employers.
  ASSUMPTIONS  AND  METHODS:  The  estimates  presented herein have been
 calculated based on the Revised 2021 Actuarial Assumptions  and  Methods
 of the impacted retirement systems.
  For  purposes  of this Fiscal Note, it has been assumed that the yield
 on 30-year U.S.  Treasury securities would equal 3.5% per year and  that
 50%  of  member  AMC  balances available for borrowing would be taken as
 loans.
  RISK AND UNCERTAINTY: The costs presented in this Fiscal  Note  depend
 highly  on  the  actuarial  assumptions, methods, and models used, demo-
 graphics of the impacted population and other factors  such  as  invest-
 ment,  contribution, and other risks. If actual experience deviates from
 actuarial  assumptions,  the  actual  costs  could  differ  from  those
 presented  herein.  Quantifying  these risks is beyond the scope of this
 Fiscal Note.
  This Fiscal Note is intended to measure  pension-related  impacts  and
 does  not  include other potential costs (e.g., administrative and Other
 Postemployment Benefits).
  STATEMENT OF ACTUARIAL OPINION: Marek Tyszkiewicz and Gregory Zelikov-
 sky are members of the Society of Actuaries and the American Academy  of
 Actuaries.  We  are  members of NYCERS but do not believe it impairs our
 objectivity and we meet the  Qualification  Standards  of  the  American
 Academy  of  Actuaries to render the actuarial opinion contained herein.
 To the best of our knowledge, the results  contained  herein  have  been
 prepared  in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles and
 procedures and with the Actuarial Standards of Practice  issued  by  the
 Actuarial Standards Board.
  FISCAL NOTE IDENTIFICATION: This Fiscal Note 2024-50 dated May 8, 2024
 was  prepared  by  the  Chief  Actuary  for the New York City Retirement
 Systems and Pension Funds. This estimate is intended for use only during
 the 2024 Legislative Session.