# Authorizes the acceptance of an application for a retroactive property tax exemption from the Center for Jewish Life of Hewlett Inc.

**Bill ID:** S9605
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Patricia Canzoneri-Fitzpatrick
**Status:** Signed by Governor
**PDF:** [S9605 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9605)

## Summary

Authorizes the acceptance of an application for a retroactive property tax exemption from the Center for Jewish Life of Hewlett Inc. for a portion of the 2021--2022 school year taxes and a portion of the 2022 general year assessment roll.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9605
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 16, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CANZONERI-FITZPATRICK  --  read  twice and ordered
  printed, and when printed to be committed to the  Committee  on  Local
  Government
 
 AN  ACT  in  relation  to  authorizing  the county of Nassau assessor to
  accept an application for a retroactive real  property  tax  exemption
  from the Center for Jewish Life of Hewlett Inc.

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
 the assessor of the county of Nassau is hereby authorized to accept from
 the Center for Jewish Life of Hewlett Inc. an application for  exemption
 from  real  property  taxes pursuant to section 430 of the real property
 tax law with respect to 2021--2022 assessment roll for a portion of  the
 2021--2022  school taxes and a portion of the 2022 general taxes for the
 parcel conveyed to such organization located at 24 Everit  Avenue,  town
 of  Hempstead, county of Nassau, otherwise known as Nassau county parcel
 ID section 39 block 78 lot 605. If accepted, the  application  shall  be
 reviewed as if it had been received on or before the taxable status date
 established for such roll.
  If  satisfied  that  such  organization would otherwise be entitled to
 such exemption  if  such  organization  had  filed  an  application  for
 exemption  by  the  appropriate  taxable status date, the assessor, upon
 approval  by  the  Nassau  county  legislature,  may  make  appropriate
 correction  to  the subject rolls. If such exemption is granted and such
 organization, therefore, shall have paid any tax  with  respect  to  the
 subject  rolls,  the applicable governing body or tax department may, in
 its sole discretion, provide for the refund  of  those  taxes  paid  and
 cancel  those  taxes,  fines,  penalties,  liens  or  interest remaining
 unpaid.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD07718-05-4