# Relates to primary elections with only uncontested elections

**Bill ID:** S9675
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Zellnor Myrie
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S9675 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9675)

## Summary

Relates to primary elections with only uncontested elections.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9675
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 17, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sen. MYRIE -- (at request of the State Board of Elections)
  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when printed to be committed to
  the Committee on Elections
 
 AN  ACT to amend the election law, in relation to primary elections with
  only uncontested elections
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Subdivision  6  of  section 8-402 of the election law, as
 amended by chapter 373 of the laws  of  1978,  is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  6. In the case of a primary election, the board shall deliver only the
 ballot  of the party in which the records of the board of elections show
 the applicant to be enrolled. In the event a primary election is  uncon-
 tested in the applicant's election district for all offices or positions
 [except  the  party position of member of the ward, town, city or county
 committee], no ballot shall be delivered  to  such  applicant  for  such
 election;  and  the  applicant shall be advised why [he is] THEY ARE not
 being sent a ballot.
  ยง 2. Subdivision 3 of section 8-702 of the election law, as  added  by
 chapter 481 of the laws of 2023, is amended to read as follows:
  3.  In  the  case  of a primary election, the board of elections shall
 deliver only the ballot of the party in which the records of  the  board
 of  elections  show the applicant to be enrolled. In the event a primary
 election is uncontested in the applicant's  election  district  for  all
 offices  or  positions [except the party position of member of the ward,
 town, city or county committee], no ballot shall be  delivered  to  such
 applicant for such election; and the applicant shall be advised why they
 are not being sent a ballot.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15503-02-4