# Relates to the dispensing of hearing aids

**Bill ID:** S9690
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9690 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9690)

## Summary

Relates to the dispensing of hearing aids; provides that hearing aids shall be sold at fair market value.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9690
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 21, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  PARKER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Consumer Protection
 
 AN ACT to amend the general business law, in relation to the  dispensing
  of hearing aids
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 802 of the general business law, as added by  chap-
 ter 599 of the laws of 1998, subdivision 1 as designated and subdivision
 2  as  added  by  chapter 301 of the laws of 2000, is amended to read as
 follows:
  ยง 802. Special provisions; [not-for-profit] FAIR MARKET  VALUE  sales.
 1. [No] WHERE A MEDICAL EVALUATION OF HEARING LOSS IS REQUIRED BY FEDER-
 AL  OR  STATE LAW PRIOR TO THE DISPENSING OF A HEARING AID, AN otolaryn-
 gologist or other licensed physician who has conducted a medical  evalu-
 ation  of  hearing  loss  [shall  engage  in  the business of dispensing
 hearing aids for a profit] MAY DISPENSE SUCH HEARING AID, AND  NECESSARY
 ITEMS  OR  SERVICES FURNISHED IN CONNECTION THEREWITH.  No otolaryngolo-
 gist or other licensed physician who has dispensed a hearing  aid  shall
 refuse  or  fail  to  perform repairs or service on any hearing aid that
 they have dispensed.  NOTWITHSTANDING THE FOREGOING, ANY HEARING AID AND
 OTHER NECESSARY ITEMS OR SERVICES, INCLUDING REPAIRS OR SERVICE  ON  ANY
 HEARING  AID, PROVIDED BY SUCH OTOLARYNGOLOGIST OR OTHER LICENSED PHYSI-
 CIAN, SHALL BE SOLD AT FAIR MARKET VALUE.
  2. Every licensed physician who engages in the dispensing  of  hearing
 aids in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be required
 to  comply with sections seven hundred ninety-one, seven hundred ninety-
 eight and eight hundred three of this article, in addition to compliance
 with this section.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15725-01-4