# Prohibits the retrospective denial of payment for substance use disorder treatment services

**Bill ID:** S9702
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Joseph P. Addabbo Jr.
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9702 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9702)

## Summary

Prohibits the retrospective denial of payment for substance use disorder treatment services if an insured was covered for such services at the time treatment was initiated; requires insurers to notify a treatment provider when an insured has lost coverage based on termination of the insured's employment.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9702
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 22, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. ADDABBO -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Insurance
 
 AN ACT to amend the insurance law, in relation to prohibiting the retro-
  spective denial  of  payment  for  substance  use  disorder  treatment
  services
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The insurance law is amended by adding a new  section  3246
 to read as follows:
  ยง  3246.  RETROSPECTIVE  DENIAL  OF  PAYMENT OF SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER
 TREATMENT SERVICES. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY  OTHER  PROVISION  OF  LAW,  ANY
 RETROSPECTIVE  DENIAL  OF  PAYMENT  OF  SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER TREATMENT
 SERVICES PROVIDED THAT ARE BASED ON THE INSURED INDIVIDUAL'S ELIGIBILITY
 SHALL BE PROHIBITED AFTER THE PROVIDER HAS  VERIFIED  WITH  THE  INSURER
 THAT THE INSURED HAS COVERAGE FOR SUCH TREATMENT AT THE TIME SUCH TREAT-
 MENT  WAS  INITIATED. THE INSURER SHALL IMMEDIATELY NOTIFY THE TREATMENT
 PROVIDER WHEN AN INSURED HAS LOST COVERAGE BASED ON TERMINATION  OF  THE
 INSURED'S  EMPLOYMENT  AND  PROVIDED,  FURTHER,  THAT DENIAL OF COVERAGE
 SHALL BE BASED ON TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT AND SHALL NOT  BE  BASED  ON
 SUSPENSION  OF  EMPLOYMENT. FAILURE OF THE INSURER TO IMMEDIATELY NOTIFY
 THE TREATMENT PROVIDER OF SUCH TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT SHALL  PRECLUDE
 ANY  RETROSPECTIVE  REVIEW  BASED  ON  THE INSURED'S ELIGIBILITY.  THIS
 SECTION SHALL BE APPLICABLE TO  THE  NEW  YORK  STATE  HEALTH  INSURANCE
 PROGRAM.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14954-01-4