# Establishes standards for the closure of banking accounts in the state of New York

**Bill ID:** S9757
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Sanders Jr.
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9757 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9757)

## Summary

Establishes standards for the closure of bank accounts in the state of New York to include providing notice of closure and the return of funds to account owners.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9757
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 29, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SANDERS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Banks
 
 AN ACT to amend the banking law, in relation  to  establishing  criteria
  for the closure of banking accounts in the state of New York
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The banking law is amended by adding a new section 9-ii  to
 read as follows:
  ยง  9-II.  CLOSURE  OF  ACCOUNTS. ALL BANKING ORGANIZATIONS AND OUT-OF-
 STATE STATE BANKS AUTHORIZED TO OPERATE AND MAINTAIN  BRANCHES  PURSUANT
 TO ARTICLE FIVE-C OF THIS CHAPTER WHEN CLOSING THE ACCOUNT OF A CUSTOMER
 SHALL:
  (A)  PROVIDE  SIXTY  DAYS'  NOTICE  THAT SUCH ACCOUNT IS BEING CLOSED,
 WHETHER FOR PERSONAL OR BUSINESS USE, AND PROVIDE THE  REASON  FOR  SUCH
 CLOSURE;  PROVIDED  THAT  NOTHING  IN THIS SECTION SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO
 PREEMPT ANY FEDERAL LAW THAT PROHIBITS DISCLOSURE OF THE REASON  FOR  AN
 ACCOUNT CLOSURE; AND
  (B)  RETURN  ANY  REMAINING  FUNDS FROM SUCH ACCOUNT WITHIN SIXTY DAYS
 AFTER THE CLOSURE OF SUCH ACCOUNT TO THE OWNER.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD14062-03-4