# Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Lieutenant Donald R. Hill Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** S9805
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** John Mannion
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9805 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9805)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system as the "Lieutenant Donald R. Hill Memorial Highway" in the city of Oswego, county of Oswego.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9805
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 31, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. MANNION -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Transportation
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "Lieutenant Donald  R.  Hill  Memorial
  Highway"
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 344-p to
 read as follows:
  ยง 344-P. PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED  AS  THE
 "LIEUTENANT  DONALD  R.  HILL MEMORIAL HIGHWAY". ALL THAT PORTION OF THE
 STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM CONSTITUTING STATE ROUTE  104,  BETWEEN  CITY  LINE
 ROAD  IN THE CITY OF OSWEGO, COUNTY OF OSWEGO, AND JIM SHAMPINE DRIVE IN
 THE CITY OF OSWEGO, COUNTY OF OSWEGO, SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND  KNOWN  AS
 THE "LIEUTENANT DONALD R. HILL MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".
  ยง  2. Subdivision 8 of section 343-k of the highway law, as amended by
 chapter 233 of the laws of 2010, is amended to read as follows:
  8. All that portion of the state highway system constituting route 104
 from the Wayne/Monroe county line to its intersection with U.S. route 11
 in Maple View, continuing north on U.S. route 11 to  the  unincorporated
 area of Adams Center in the town of Adams, Jefferson county. In addition
 all  that  portion  of the state highway system constituting state route
 350 from its intersection with state route  104  in  the  unincorporated
 area  of  Ontario  Center  in  the town of Ontario, Wayne county, to the
 intersection of state route 31 in the town of Macedon and state route 31
 to the Wayne/Monroe county line, EXCEPTING  THEREFROM  THAT  PORTION  OF
 SUCH  ROUTE  DESIGNATED AS THE "LIEUTENANT DONALD R. HILL MEMORIAL HIGH-
 WAY" PURSUANT TO SECTION THREE HUNDRED  FORTY-FOUR-P  OF  THIS  ARTICLE,
 shall be designated and known as the "Lake Ontario Wine Trail".
  ยง  3. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the instal-
 lation and maintenance of adequate signing of the state  highway  system
 as  designated  pursuant  to  section one of this act. However, to avoid
 confusion and to limit any possible disruption of commerce,  the  desig-
 nation  called  for  pursuant to section one of this act shall be one of
 ceremonial nature and the official name of such  highway  shall  not  be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15815-01-4