# Authorizes the Seagate police department receive a special parking placard

**Bill ID:** S9863
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Jessica Scarcella-Spanton
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9863 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9863)

## Summary

Authorizes the Seagate police department receive a special parking placard for the department's motor vehicles when such officers are on official business as peace officers.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9863
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  June 6, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. SCARCELLA-SPANTON -- read twice and ordered printed,
  and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the vehicle and traffic  law,  in  relation  to  parking
  regulations for the Seagate police department
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 1203 of the vehicle and traffic law is  amended  by
 adding a new subdivision (e) to read as follows:
  (E)  WHERE  PARKING  IS PROHIBITED BY SIGNS, BUT NOT WHERE STOPPING OR
 STANDING IS PROHIBITED, A PEACE OFFICER,  AS  DESIGNATED  UNDER  SECTION
 2.10  OF  THE  CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE  LAW,  EMPLOYED BY THE SEAGATE POLICE
 DEPARTMENT AND ACTING WITHIN THE SCOPE OF SUCH PEACE OFFICER'S  OFFICIAL
 DUTIES,  MAY PARK A MOTOR VEHICLE OWNED BY SUCH POLICE DEPARTMENT, IDEN-
 TIFIED BY A SPECIAL PLACARD  ISSUED  BY  THE  COMMISSIONER  PURSUANT  TO
 SECTION FOUR HUNDRED FOUR-FF OF THIS CHAPTER.
  ยง  2.  The  vehicle and traffic law is amended by adding a new section
 404-ff to read as follows:
  ยง 404-FF. DISTINCTIVE PLACARD FOR THE SEAGATE  POLICE  DEPARTMENT.  1.
 THE  SEAGATE  POLICE  DEPARTMENT, UPON REQUEST, SHALL BE ISSUED A SET OF
 DISTINCTIVE PLACARDS EACH BEARING A UNIQUE SERIAL NUMBER  IN  SUCH  FORM
 AND  DETAIL  AS  THE  COMMISSIONER SHALL PRESCRIBE. APPLICATION FOR SUCH
 PLACARD SHALL BE FILED WITH THE COMMISSIONER AND SHALL BE VERIFIED ANNU-
 ALLY BY THE APPLICANT.
  2. THE DISTINCTIVE PLACARDS AUTHORIZED UNDER SUBDIVISION ONE  OF  THIS
 SECTION  SHALL  BE  ISSUED UPON PROOF, SATISFACTORY TO THE COMMISSIONER,
 THAT THE APPLICANT IS PRESENTLY A MEMBER OF THE SEAGATE  POLICE  DEPART-
 MENT  AND SUCH PLACARDS SHALL BE USED WHEN THE SEAGATE POLICE DEPARTMENT
 IS ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS AS PEACE OFFICERS, AS DESIGNATED  UNDER  SECTION
 2.10 OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE LAW.
  3.  THE  DISTINCTIVE PLACARDS ISSUED PURSUANT TO THIS SECTION SHALL BE
 ISSUED UPON PAYMENT  OF  AN  INITIAL  ONE  TIME  SERVICE  CHARGE  TO  BE
 PRESCRIBED BY THE COMMISSIONER.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15858-01-4