# Relates to concealment of identity in a lawful or unlawful assembly or riot

**Bill ID:** S9867
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** James Skoufis
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9867 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9867)

## Summary

Establishes the offense of concealment of identity in a lawful assembly, unlawful assembly or riot.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9867
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  June 14, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SKOUFIS -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to  unlawful  concealment  of
  identity
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The penal law is amended by adding a new section 240.12  to
 read as follows:
 ยง 240.12 CONCEALMENT  OF  IDENTITY IN A LAWFUL ASSEMBLY, UNLAWFUL ASSEM-
  BLY, OR RIOT.
  1. IT SHALL BE UNLAWFUL FOR ANY  PERSON  OR  PERSONS,  INVOLVED  IN  A
 LAWFUL  ASSEMBLY,  UNLAWFUL  ASSEMBLY, OR RIOT, TO WEAR A HOOD, MASK, OR
 DEVICE WHEREBY THE PERSON OR THE PERSON'S FACE IS  DISGUISED  SO  AS  TO
 CONCEAL  THE IDENTITY OF THE WEARER. THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY TO ANY
 PERSON OR PERSONS WEARING PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT FOR THE  PURPOSE
 OF ENSURING THE PHYSICAL HEALTH OR SAFETY OF THE WEARER OR OTHERS DURING
 A  DECLARED PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY, NOR SHALL IT APPLY TO ANY PERSON OR
 PERSONS WEARING ATTIRE THAT CONCEALS THEIR IDENTITY  IF  THE  ATTIRE  IS
 WORN FOR RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCE OR CUSTOMS.
  2.  FOR  THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT"
 SHALL MEAN ALL EQUIPMENT WORN OR USED TO MINIMIZE EXPOSURE TO A COMMUNI-
 CABLE DISEASE, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO FACE COVERINGS  DESIGNED  TO
 MINIMIZE EXPOSURE TO A COMMUNICABLE DISEASE AND FACE SHIELDS.
  CONCEALMENT  OF  IDENTITY  IN A LAWFUL ASSEMBLY, UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY, OR
 RIOT IS A VIOLATION.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD15380-03-4