# Relates to the sale of ammunition for assault weapons

**Bill ID:** S9873
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Roxanne J. Persaud
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9873 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9873)

## Summary

Relates to limiting ammunition for assault weapons to two times the capacity of an authorized weapon over a one hundred twenty day period.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9873
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  July 10, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. PERSAUD -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to the sale of ammunition for
  assault weapons
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section  1.  Subdivision  4  of  section  270.00  of the penal law, as
 amended by chapter 180 of the laws  of  1997,  is  amended  to  read  as
 follows:
  4.  Sales  of  ammunition  not  prohibited.  Nothing contained in this
 section shall be construed to prevent, or interfere in any way with, the
 sale of ammunition for revolvers or pistols of any kind, or for  rifles,
 shot  guns,  or other arms, belonging or which may belong to any persons
 whether as sporting or hunting weapons or for the purpose of  protection
 to them in their homes, or, as they may go abroad; and manufacturers are
 authorized  to  continue  to manufacture, and wholesalers and dealers to
 continue to deal in and freely to sell ammunition to  all  such  persons
 for such purposes. PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THE SALE OF AMMUNITION FOR ASSAULT
 WEAPONS,  AS DEFINED BY SUBDIVISION TWENTY-TWO OF SECTION 265.00 OF THIS
 TITLE, SHALL BE LIMITED TO TWO TIMES THE CAPACITY OF AN AUTHORIZED WEAP-
 ON OVER A ONE HUNDRED TWENTY DAY PERIOD. FOR PURPOSES OF  THIS  SUBDIVI-
 SION,  "AUTHORIZED  WEAPON" SHALL MEAN A WEAPON REGISTERED IN ACCORDANCE
 WITH SUBDIVISION SIXTEEN-A OF SECTION 400.00 OF THIS CHAPTER.  NOTWITH-
 STANDING  ANY  LAW, RULE OR REGULATION TO THE CONTRARY, THE VIOLATION OF
 THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL CONSTITUTE A CLASS E FELONY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD01713-01-3