# Establishes the crime of assault on a food delivery person

**Bill ID:** S9924AA
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Iwen Chu
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9924AA PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9924AA)

## Summary

Establishes the crime of assault on a food delivery person as a class E felony; defines a food delivery person to mean a person employed by a restaurant, or put into service by a restaurant, retail food store licensed by the department of agriculture and markets, or a third party vendor, or to deliver food or other goods pursuant to an order placed by a customer.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9924--A
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  October 4, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  CHU  --  read  twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be  committed  to  the  Committee  on  Rules  --  committee
  discharged, bill amended, ordered reprinted as amended and recommitted
  to said committee
 
 AN ACT to amend the penal law, in relation to assault on a food delivery
  person
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The penal law is amended by adding a new  section  120.19-a
 to read as follows:
 ยง 120.19-A ASSAULT ON A FOOD DELIVERY PERSON.
  1.  A  PERSON IS GUILTY OF ASSAULT ON A FOOD DELIVERY PERSON WHEN SUCH
 PERSON CAUSES PHYSICAL INJURY TO SUCH FOOD DELIVERY  PERSON  DURING  THE
 PERFORMANCE OF THEIR FOOD DELIVERY RESPONSIBILITIES; OR
  2.  STRIKES,  SHOVES,  KICKS,  OR  OTHERWISE  SUBJECTS A FOOD DELIVERY
 PERSON TO PHYSICAL CONTACT, WHICH INCLUDES SPITTING ON SUCH FOOD  DELIV-
 ERY PERSON, AND SUCH FOOD DELIVERY PERSON IS ON-DUTY.
  3. FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION:
  (A)  "FOOD  DELIVERY PERSON" SHALL MEAN A PERSON EMPLOYED BY A RESTAU-
 RANT, OR PUT INTO SERVICE BY A RESTAURANT, RETAIL FOOD STORE LICENSED BY
 THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND MARKETS, OR A THIRD PARTY  VENDOR,  TO
 DELIVER FOOD OR OTHER GOODS PURSUANT TO AN ORDER PLACED BY A CUSTOMER.
  (B) "RESTAURANT" MEANS ANY COFFEE SHOP, CAFETERIA, LUNCHEONETTE, SAND-
 WICH STAND, DINER, SHORT ORDER CAFE, FAST FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, SODA FOUN-
 TAIN,  BUBBLE  TEA SHOP, FOOD STAND, FOOD TRUCK, AND ANY OTHER EATING OR
 BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT WHICH PROVIDES FOOD DELIVERY SERVICE AS AN ADVER-
 TISED PART OF ITS BUSINESS OPERATION OR CONTRACTS FOOD DELIVERY SERVICES
 THROUGH A THIRD PARTY VENDOR.
  ASSAULT ON A FOOD DELIVERY PERSON IS A CLASS E FELONY.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the ninetieth day  after  it  shall
 have become a law.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD09445-06-4