# Designates a portion of the state highway system in the town of Haverstraw, county of Rockland, as the "Hector L. Soto Memorial Highway"

**Bill ID:** S9939
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** William Weber
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9939 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9939)

## Summary

Designates a portion of the state highway system in the town of Haverstraw, county of Rockland, as the "Hector L. Soto Memorial Highway".

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9939
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  October 23, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  WEBER  -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the highway law, in relation to designating a portion of
  the state highway system as the "Hector L. Soto Memorial Highway"
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. The highway law is amended by adding a new section 345-c to
 read as follows:
  ยง  345-C.  PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM TO BE DESIGNATED AS THE
 "HECTOR L. SOTO MEMORIAL HIGHWAY". ALL THAT PORTION OF THE STATE HIGHWAY
 SYSTEM CONSTITUTING STATE ROUTE TWO HUNDRED TWO BETWEEN ROSMAN ROAD  AND
 STATE  ROUTE  FORTY-FIVE  IN THE TOWN OF HAVERSTRAW, COUNTY OF ROCKLAND,
 SHALL BE DESIGNATED AND KNOWN AS THE "HECTOR L. SOTO MEMORIAL HIGHWAY".
  ยง 2. The commissioner of transportation shall provide for the  instal-
 lation  and  maintenance of adequate signing of the state highway system
 as designated pursuant to section one of this  act.  However,  to  avoid
 confusion  and  to limit any possible disruption of commerce, the desig-
 nation called for pursuant to section one of this act shall  be  one  of
 ceremonial  nature  and  the  official name of such highway shall not be
 changed as a result of this act.
  ยง 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD16329-02-4