# Defines the terms "cell" and "out-of-cell"

**Bill ID:** S9946
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Julia Salazar
**Status:** In Senate Committee
**PDF:** [S9946 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S9946)

## Summary

Defines the terms "cell" and "out-of-cell" to clarify meaning of cell confinement and the amount or type of space deemed a cell or out-of-cell.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  9946
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  November 12, 2024
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen. SALAZAR -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Rules
 
 AN ACT to amend the correction law, in relation to  the  definitions  of
  cell and out-of-cell
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:

  Section 1. Section 2 of the correction law is amended by adding  three
 new subdivisions 35, 36 and 37 to read as follows:
  35.  "CELL"  MEANS ANY ROOM, AREA OR SPACE THAT IS USED OR IS INTENDED
 TO BE USED BY AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL FOR SLEEP; OR ANY  ROOM,  AREA,
 OR  SPACE  THAT IS NOT A SHARED SPACE CONDUCIVE TO MEANINGFUL CONGREGATE
 SOCIAL INTERACTION AMONG MANY PEOPLE IN A GROUP SETTING APPROPRIATE  FOR
 THE  NUMBER  OF  PEOPLE  IN  THE SPACE WITHOUT PHYSICAL BARRIERS BETWEEN
 PEOPLE WHERE A PERSON OR PERSONS ARE HELD FOR ANY PURPOSE; OR ANY  ROOM,
 AREA, OR SPACE IN THAT IS NOT OUT-OF-CELL.
  36. "CELL CONFINEMENT" MEANS BEING IN A CELL.
  37.  "OUT-OF-CELL"  MEANS  BEING  IN A SPACE OUTSIDE OF AND IN AN AREA
 AWAY FROM A CELL, IN A GROUP SETTING (INCLUDING A GROUP CLASSROOM,  OPEN
 GROUP  RECREATION  YARD,  GROUP  LIBRARY  OR  LAW LIBRARY, GROUP CONTACT
 VISITS ROOM, OR OTHER EQUIVALENT SPACE), WITH MANY OTHER PEOPLE  ALL  IN
 THE  SAME  SHARED SPACE WITHOUT PHYSICAL BARRIERS BETWEEN PEOPLE THAT IS
 CONDUCIVE TO MEANINGFUL CONGREGATE SOCIAL INTERACTION AND ACTIVITY AMONG
 THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN THE SPACE,  FOR  PURPOSES  INCLUDING  CONGREGATE
 PROGRAMMING,  CONGREGATE  RECREATION, CONGREGATE CONTACT VISITS, CONGRE-
 GATE LIBRARY SERVICES, CONGREGATE LAW LIBRARY SERVICES, CONGREGATE JOBS,
 CONGREGATE MEALS, OR EQUIVALENT CONGREGATE ACTIVITIES;  OR  BEING  IN  A
 SPACE  OUTSIDE  OF  AND  IN  AN AREA AWAY FROM A CELL DURING THE TIME OF
 MEDICAL TREATMENT, INDIVIDUAL COUNSELING, AN ATTORNEY VISIT,  OR  EQUIV-
 ALENT  SERVICE,  IN A SETTING CONDUCIVE TO THE PROVISION OF SUCH SERVICE
 WITH A PERSON IN CUSTODY IN THE SAME SHARED  SPACE  WITH  THEIR  SERVICE
 PROVIDER WITHOUT PHYSICAL BARRIERS BETWEEN THEM.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD16390-01-4