# Requires certain public schools in any city with a population over one million to offer food options

**Bill ID:** S19
**Session:** 2024
**Sponsor:** Andrew Gounardes
**Status:** In Assembly Committee
**PDF:** [S19 PDF](https://legislation.nysenate.gov/pdf/bills/2024/S19)

## Summary

Requires public schools in any city with a population over one million that have at least 25% of students practicing a religious faith with specific dietary restrictions to offer food options which meet such dietary restrictions.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  19
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  (PREFILED)
 
  January 4, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sens.  GOUNARDES, COMRIE, LIU, PERSAUD, STAVISKY -- read
  twice and ordered printed, and when printed to  be  committed  to  the
  Committee on New York City Education
 
 AN  ACT  to  amend  the  education law, in relation to requiring certain
  public schools in any city with a population over one million to offer
  food options which meet dietary restrictions of certain students
 
  THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section  1. The education law is amended by adding a new section 915-a
 to read as follows:
  ยง 915-A. FOOD OPTIONS. 1. IN ANY CITY HAVING OVER ONE MILLION INHABIT-
 ANTS, ANY PUBLIC SCHOOL THAT HAS TWENTY-FIVE PERCENT OR MORE OF STUDENTS
 PRACTICING A RELIGIOUS FAITH WITH SPECIFIC  DIETARY  RESTRICTIONS  SHALL
 OFFER  FOOD  OPTIONS  WHICH  MEET SUCH DIETARY RESTRICTIONS AT EACH MEAL
 OFFERED.
  2. ANY PUBLIC SCHOOL IN A CITY WITH A POPULATION  OF  ONE  MILLION  OR
 MORE  WITH FEWER THAN TWENTY-FIVE PERCENT OF STUDENTS PRACTICING A RELI-
 GIOUS FAITH WITH SPECIFIC DIETARY RESTRICTIONS SHALL OFFER FOOD  OPTIONS
 AT  EACH  MEAL  THAT  MEET  SUCH DIETARY RESTRICTIONS UPON ANY STUDENT'S
 REQUEST AND IN  SUFFICIENT  AMOUNTS  TO  MEET  THE  NEEDS  OF  ANY  SUCH
 STUDENTS,  BUT  SHALL  NOT  OTHERWISE  BE  REQUIRED  TO  OFFER SUCH FOOD
 OPTIONS.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect on the one hundred twentieth day after
 it shall have become a law. Effective immediately, the addition,  amend-
 ment  and/or repeal of any rules or regulations necessary for the imple-
 mentation of this act on its effective date are authorized to be made on
 or before such date.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD00657-01-3