# Requires the empire state development corporation to conduct a study on the economic impact of the Labor Day Parade (West Indian Carnival)

**Bill ID:** S7347
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Kevin S. Parker
**Status:** In Senate Committee

## Summary

Requires the empire state development corporation to conduct a study on the economic impact of the Labor Day Parade (West Indian Carnival) and submit a report to the governor and the legislature on its findings.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7347
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 19, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by  Sen.  PARKER -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Commerce, Economic  Devel-
  opment and Small Business
 
 AN  ACT  requiring the empire state development corporation to conduct a
  study on the economic impact of the  Labor  Day  Parade  (West  Indian
  Carnival)

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. Report on economic impact of the  Labor  Day  Parade  (West
 Indian  Carnival).  1.  The  empire  state development corporation shall
 prepare a summary report on the economic impact of the Labor Day  Parade
 (West  Indian  Carnival)  held  in  the borough of Brooklyn. Such report
 shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
  a. the number of participants in such parade, including a breakdown of
 resident and non-resident participants;
  b. an estimate of money spent by participants in the parade  including
 but  not  limited  to expenditures on hotels and motels and restaurants;
 and
  c. an estimate of the  number  of  jobs  and/or  businesses  that  are
 supported  by participants as well as the amount of sales tax and income
 tax generated by such participants.
  2. The results of the report required by this act shall  be  submitted
 to  the  governor  and to the legislature no later than January 1, 2025,
 along with any legislative recommendations of the empire state  develop-
 ment  corporation  to  further  enhance the economic impact of Labor Day
 Parade (West Indian Carnival).
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08112-01-3