# Relates to declaring the goal of the state of New York to source reduce, reuse, recycle, or compost no less than eighty-five percent of the solid waste generated by the year 2033

**Bill ID:** A7201
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Deborah Glick
**Status:** In Assembly Committee

## Summary

Relates to declaring the goal of the state of New York to source reduce, reuse, recycle, or compost no less than eighty-five percent of the solid waste generated by the year 2033.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  7201
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  A S S E M B L Y
 
  May 12, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by M. of A. GLICK -- read once and referred to the Committee
  on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN ACT to amend the  environmental  conservation  law,  in  relation  to
  declaring  the  goal of the state of New York to source reduce, reuse,
  recycle, or compost no less than  eighty-five  percent  of  the  solid
  waste generated by the year 2033

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1. The environmental conservation law is amended by  adding  a
 new section 27-0102 to read as follows:
 ยง 27-0102. DECLARATION OF POLICY.
  THE  LEGISLATURE  HEREBY DECLARES THAT IT SHALL BE A GOAL OF THE STATE
 OF NEW YORK TO SOURCE REDUCE, REUSE, RECYCLE, OR COMPOST  NO  LESS  THAN
 EIGHTY-FIVE  PERCENT  OF THE SOLID WASTE GENERATED BY THE YEAR TWO THOU-
 SAND THIRTY-THREE, AND ANNUALLY THEREAFTER.
  ยง 2. Subdivision 1 of section 3-0301 of the environmental conservation
 law is amended by adding a new paragraph oo to read as follows:
  OO. ADVISE AND COOPERATE WITH PLANNING UNITS, AS  DEFINED  IN  SECTION
 27-0107  OF THIS CHAPTER, TO ACHIEVE THE GOAL OF SECTION 27-0102 OF THIS
 CHAPTER.
  ยง 3. No later than January 1, 2026, the  department  of  environmental
 conservation  shall  submit a report to the governor and the legislature
 outlining strategies to achieve the state's  goal  pursuant  to  section
 27-0102 of the environmental conservation law.
  ยง 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
 
 
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD08203-01-3