# Relates to funds concerning state university health care facilities

**Bill ID:** S6736
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Rachel May
**Status:** In Senate Committee

## Summary

Relates to funds concerning state university health care facilities; prohibits the use of such funds for payment of certain debts related to a state university health care facility.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6736
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 8, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced by Sens. MAY, MANNION, MYRIE -- read twice and ordered print-
  ed, and when printed to be committed to the Committee on Higher Educa-
  tion
 
 AN ACT to amend the education law, in relation to funds concerning state
  university health care facilities
 
  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  Subdivision 8-a of section 355 of the  education  law,  as
 amended  by  section  8  of part Q of chapter 56 of the laws of 2013, is
 amended to read as follows:
  8-a. All monies received by state university  health  care  facilities
 from  fees,  charges, and reimbursement and from all other sources shall
 be credited to a state university health care account in a  fund  to  be
 designated  by  the  state comptroller. Notwithstanding the provision of
 any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, a portion  of  such  monies
 credited  may  be transferred to a state university account as requested
 by the state university chancellor or his or  her  designee.  Monies  to
 establish  reserves  for  long-term  expenses of state university health
 care facilities and to fulfill obligations required for any contract for
 health care services authorized pursuant to subdivision sixteen of  this
 section  may  be  designated  by  the  state university as a reserve and
 transferred to a separate contractual reserve account.  The  amounts  in
 such  accounts shall be available for use in accordance with paragraph b
 of subdivision four and subdivision eight of this section. Monies  shall
 only  be  expended from the state university health care account and the
 contractual reserve account pursuant to  appropriation.  Notwithstanding
 any provision of this chapter, the state finance law or any other law to
 the  contrary, such appropriations shall remain in full force and effect
 for two years from the effective date of the  appropriation  act  making
 the  appropriation.  Monies  so transferred may be returned to the state
 university health care account; provided, however, that  funds  in  such

  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD05706-01-3
 S. 6736  2
 
 contractual  reserve  account must be sufficient to meet the obligations
 of all such contracts. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER  LAW,  RULE,  OR  REGU-
 LATION  TO  THE  CONTRARY, NO STATE AGENCY OR STATE OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE
 ACTING  IN  THEIR  OFFICIAL  CAPACITY,  MAY TRANSFER, LOAN, OR OTHERWISE
 APPROPRIATE ANY INCOME OR FUNDS IMPACTING, INVOLVING, GENERATED  BY,  OR
 APPROPRIATED  FOR  ANY  COMPONENT  OF THE STATE UNIVERSITY, OR COMMUNITY
 COLLEGES AS DEFINED BY SECTION SIXTY-THREE HUNDRED ONE OF  THIS  CHAPTER
 OPERATING  UNDER  THE  PROGRAM  OF  THE STATE UNIVERSITY, INCLUDING SUCH
 INCOME OR FUNDS IMPACTING, INVOLVING, GENERATED BY, OR APPROPRIATED  FOR
 A  STATE  UNIVERSITY  HEALTH  CARE  FACILITY, TO THE GENERAL FUND OR ANY
 OTHER FUND OR ACCOUNT HELD WITHIN THE AUSPICES OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE
 STATE OF NEW YORK, FOR PREPAYMENT, REPAYMENT,  OR  OTHERWISE  RECOMPENSE
 FOR DEBT SERVICE COSTS RELATED TO A STATE UNIVERSITY HEALTH CARE FACILI-
 TY.  THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBDIVISION SHALL SUPERSEDE ANY OTHER GENER-
 AL, SPECIAL OR LOCAL LAW INCONSISTENT THEREWITH NOTWITHSTANDING,  UNLESS
 THIS  SECTION  IS  EXPRESSLY  AND SPECIFICALLY REFERRED TO IN SUCH OTHER
 GENERAL, SPECIAL OR LOCAL LAW.
  ยง 2. This act shall take effect immediately.