# Relates to decommissioning nuclear power plant discharges into the Hudson River

**Bill ID:** S6893
**Session:** 2023
**Sponsor:** Pete Harckham
**Status:** Signed by Governor

## Summary

Provides that it shall be unlawful to discharge any radiological substance into the Hudson River in connection with the decommissioning of a nuclear power plant; provides for attorney general enforcement.

---

## Full Text

S T A T E  O F  N E W  Y O R K
 ________________________________________________________________________
 
  6893
 
  2023-2024 Regular Sessions
 
  I N  S E N A T E
 
  May 15, 2023
  ___________
 
 Introduced  by Sen. HARCKHAM -- read twice and ordered printed, and when
  printed to be committed to the Committee on Environmental Conservation
 
 AN ACT to amend the  environmental  conservation  law,  in  relation  to
  decommissioning nuclear power plant discharges into the Hudson River

  THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEM-
 BLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
  Section 1.  The environmental conservation law is amended by adding  a
 new article 30 to read as follows:
  ARTICLE 30
  DECOMMISSIONING NUCLEAR POWER PLANT DISCHARGES INTO THE HUDSON RIVER
 SECTION 30-0101. LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
  30-0103. UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES.
 § 30-101. LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
  1.  THE  LEGISLATURE  FINDS  THAT WHILE THE ENERGY AND ECONOMIC OUTPUT
 GENERATED BY NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS ARE BENEFICIAL TO THE  STATE  AND  ITS
 RESIDENTS,  DISCHARGES  INTO  WATERS OF THE STATE OF RADIOLOGICAL AGENTS
 FROM NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS HAVE VARIOUS ADVERSE AND SUBSTANTIAL  ECONOMIC
 IMPACTS ON THE STATE AND ITS RESIDENTS.
  2.  THE  LEGISLATURE  FURTHER FINDS THAT COMMUNITIES WITH INTERESTS IN
 THE HUDSON RIVER ARE CONCERNED WITH THE ECONOMIC IMPACTS ON  LOCAL  REAL
 ESTATE  VALUES AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT WITH RESPECT TO THE DISCHARGE OF
 WASTE FROM NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS INTO WATERS OF THE  STATE  DURING  PLANT
 DECOMMISSIONING,  WHICH  EFFECT  IS NO LONGER BALANCED BY COUNTERVAILING
 ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF THE PLANT  TO  THOSE  COMMUNITIES  THAT  THE  PLANT
 PROVIDED DURING OPERATION.
  3.  THE LEGISLATURE FURTHER FINDS THAT OTHER METHODS OF MANAGING WASTE
 FROM DECOMMISSIONING NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS ARE AVAILABLE  AND  WOULD  NOT
 RESULT IN THE SAME ECONOMIC IMPACTS.
  4. THE LEGISLATURE THEREFORE FINDS AND DECLARES THAT IT IS THE DUTY OF
 THE  STATE TO ACT TO PRESERVE THE ECONOMIC VITALITY OF AFFECTED COMMUNI-
 TIES.
 
  EXPLANATION--Matter in ITALICS (underscored) is new; matter in brackets
  [ ] is old law to be omitted.
  LBD11357-03-3
 S. 6893  2
 
 § 30-0103. UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES.
  TO  THE  EXTENT NOT SUBJECT TO PREEMPTION BY FEDERAL LAW, AND NOTWITH-
 STANDING ANY OTHER STATE OR  LOCAL  LAW,  RULE,  OR  REGULATION  TO  THE
 CONTRARY,  IT  SHALL BE UNLAWFUL TO DISCHARGE ANY RADIOLOGICAL SUBSTANCE
 INTO THE HUDSON RIVER IN CONNECTION WITH THE DECOMMISSIONING OF A NUCLE-
 AR POWER PLANT.
  § 2. Article 71 of the environmental conservation law  is  amended  by
 adding a new title 28 to read as follows:
  TITLE 28
  ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE 30
 SECTION 71-2801. APPLICABILITY OF TITLE.
  71-2803. PENALTIES.
  71-2805. ATTORNEY GENERAL ENFORCEMENT.
 § 71-2801. APPLICABILITY OF TITLE.
  IN  ADDITION TO THE PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS 71-0101 AND 71-0301 OF THIS
 ARTICLE, THE PROVISIONS  OF  THIS  TITLE  SHALL  BE  APPLICABLE  TO  THE
 ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE 30 OF THIS CHAPTER AND TO THIS TITLE.
 § 71-2803. PENALTIES.
  ANY  PERSON  WHO  VIOLATES  SECTION  30-0103  OF THIS CHAPTER SHALL BE
 LIABLE FOR A CIVIL PENALTY NOT  TO  EXCEED  THIRTY-SEVEN  THOUSAND  FIVE
 HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR THE FIRST DAY OF THE VIOLATION, NOT TO EXCEED SEVEN-
 TY-FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR THE SECOND DAY OF THE VIOLATION, AND NOT TO
 EXCEED ONE HUNDRED FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS PER VIOLATION THEREAFTER.  FOR
 PURPOSES  OF THIS SECTION, EACH DAY IN WHICH A VIOLATION OCCURS SHALL BE
 CONSIDERED A SEPARATE VIOLATION.
 § 71-2805. ATTORNEY GENERAL ENFORCEMENT.
  THE PENALTIES PROVIDED BY SECTION  71-2803  OF  THIS  TITLE  SHALL  BE
 RECOVERABLE IN AN ACTION BROUGHT BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
  §  3.  Severability. The provisions of this act shall be severable and
 if any portion thereof or the applicability thereof  to  any  person  or
 circumstances  shall  be held invalid, the remainder of this act and the
 application thereof shall not be affected thereby.
  § 4. This act shall take effect immediately.